<start>
Come on, Helge, Harry urged. He knew quite a bit about the
ageing bank manager, too. Harry knew that he had two standard
poodles, a wife and a recently jilted pregnant daughter waiting for
him at home. They had packed and were ready to drive to their
mountain chalet as soon as Helge returned. At precisely this
moment Helge felt he was submerged in water, in the kind of
dream where all your movements slow down however much you
try to hurry. Then he came into Harry’s eld of vision. The bank
robber had swung Stine’s chair round so that he was behind her,
but now faced Helge. Like a frightened child who has to feed a
horse, Helge stood back and held out the bunch of keys, his arm
stretched to the limit. The masked man whispered in Stine’s ear as
he turned the machine gun on Helge, who took two unsteady steps
backwards.

<start>
We aren’t. He was talking to the whole of the investigation
team. He said there are under a hundred bank robbers in Oslo.
Fifty of them are so stupid, doped up or mental that we nail them
almost every time. Half of them are in prison, so we can ignore
them. Forty are skilled craftsmen who manage to slip through so
long as someone helps them with the planning. And then there are
ten pros, the ones who attack security vans and cash-processing
centres. To get them we need a lucky break, and we try to keep
tabs on them at all times. They are being asked to give alibis right
now. Harry cast a glance at Silvia, who was gurgling away on the
ling cabinet. And I had a word with Weber from Forensics on
Saturday.

<start>
Ivarsson was tall, long-limbed, with a fringe of undulating blond
hair above two blue eyes. His face had those masculine
characteristics which models for German brands like Boss tend to
have, and was still tanned after many summer afternoons on the
tennis court and perhaps the odd solarium session in a tness
centre. In short, Rune Ivarsson was what most would regard as a
good-looking man, and as such he underpinned Harry’s theory
about the link between looks and competence in police work.
However, what Rune Ivarsson lacked in investigative talent, he
made up for with a nose for politics and the ability to form
alliances within the Police HQ hierarchy. Furthermore, Ivarsson
had the natural self-condence that many misinterpret as a
leadership quality.

<start>
THE RAIN WAS MAKING SPEED LINES AGAINST THE PRE-maturely darkened October
sky in the light from the outside lamp. From the ceramic sign
beneath, Harry read that Espen, Stine and Trond Grette lived here,
here being a yellow terraced house in Disengrenda. He pressed
the bell and surveyed the locality. Disengrenda was four long rows
of terraced houses at the centre of a large at eld encircled by
blocks of ats, which reminded Harry of pioneers on the prairie
taking up a defensive position against Indian attacks. Perhaps that
was how it was. The terraced houses were built in the sixties for
the burgeoning middle classes and perhaps the dwindling local
population of workers in the blocks in Disenveien and Traverveien
already knew that these were the new conquerors ; that they would
have hegemony over the new country.

<start>
Serious Crime, Harry said. Serious Crime. On the left of Hole, we have Torleif Weber from
Forensics who led the inquiry at the crime scene. As many of you
know, Weber is our most experienced forensic investigator.
Famous for his analytical powers and unerring intuition. The Chief
Superintendent once said that he would have liked to have Weber
with him as a tracker dog in his hunting parties.
Laughter around the table. Harry didn’t need to look at Weber to
know that he wasn’t smiling. Weber almost never smiled, at least
not for people he didn’t like, and he liked almost no one.
Especially among the younger stratum of bosses which, in Weber’s
opinion, was comprised exclusively of incompetent careerists with
no feeling for the profession or the force, but who had stronger
instincts for the administrative power and inuence which could be
attained through brief appearances at Police HQ.
Ivarsson smiled and swayed up and down like the skipper of a
seagoing vessel as he waited for the laughter to die down.
Beate Lonn is quite new in this context and our video recording
specialist.

<start>
Serious personality disorder.
But everything else he does seems so rational.
A personality disorder doesn’t mean he is stupid. Suerers are
just as good, frequently better, at achieving their aims. What
distinguishes them from us is that they want dierent things.
What about drugs? Is there a drug which can make an otherwise
normal person so aggressive that he wants to kill ?
Aune shook his head. Drugs will only emphasise or weaken
latent tendencies. A drunk who kills his wife also has a propensity
to beat her when sober. Wilful murders like this one are almost
always committed by people with a particular predisposition.
So what you are saying is that this guy is barking ?
Or pre-programmed. Pre-programmed ?
Aune nodded in assent. Do you remember the robber who was
never caught, Raskol Baxhet ?
Harry shook his head. Gypsy, Aune said. There were rumours going round about this
mysterious gure for a number of years. He was supposed to be the
real brains behind all the major robberies of security vans and
nancial institutions in Oslo in the eighties. It took a number of
years for the police to accept that he actually existed and even
then they never managed to produce any evidence against him.

<start>
Harry was talking to wax dolls. Immobile, soulless,
dehumanised. Harry was sweating inside the mask now and the
blood was throbbing in his temples, each throb leaving a dull pain.
He didn’t want to see people around him, didn’t want to meet their
accusatory eyes.
Put the money in a bag, he said to the faceless person in front
of him. And put the bag above your head.
The faceless one began to laugh, and Harry turned the gun
round to hit him over the head with the butt, but missed. Now the
others in the bank started to laugh and Harry observed them
through the unevenly cut holes in the mask. They suddenly seemed
familiar. The girl by the second counter resembled Birgitta. And he
would swear the coloured man by the ticket dispenser was Andrew.
And the white-haired lady with the pram.

<start>
THE SUN HAD DISAPPEARED BEHIND A LAYER OF STEEL-GREY clouds which had crept in
very low over Oslo fjord, and the southerly wind was gusting near
to gale force, like an overture to the rain that had been forecast.
Roof gutters whistled and awnings apped all along Kirkeveien.
The trees were completely stripped now; it was as though the last
colours had been sucked out of the town and Oslo had been left in
black and white. Harry bent into the wind and put his hands in his
pockets to hold onto his coat. He noted that the bottom button had
decamped, probably during the evening or night, and it wasn’t the
only thing to have gone missing. When he went to call Anna for
some help reconstructing the night, he discovered he had lost his
mobile phone, too. And on ringing her from a xed line, he heard
a voice which vaguely reminded him of an announcer from the
past. It said the person he was trying to contact was unavailable at
the moment, but he could leave his number or a message. He
hadn’t bothered.

<start>
Harry breathed in. How is the court case going ?
Harry was listening, but was unable to order the words into
sentences which made sense. He picked up nancial status, the
best for the child and arbitration and gathered that there wasn’t
much news. The next meeting with the lawyers had been
postponed until Friday; Oleg was ne, but was sick of living in a
hotel.
‘ Tell him I am looking forward to having you back, ’ he said.
When they had rung o, Harry stood wondering if he should ring
back. But what for? To tell her he had been invited to dinner by an
old ame and he had no idea what had taken place? Harry rested
his hand on the telephone, but then the smoke alarm in the kitchen
went o. And when he had taken the frying pan o the hob and
opened the window, the telephone rang again. Later Harry was to
reect that a lot would have been dierent, if Bjarne Møller had
not chosen to ring him that evening.

<start>
I am WATCHING THE FIRST VIDEO. WHEN I TAKE IT FRAME BY frame I can see the spurt
of flame. Particles of powder which as yet have not been converted into
pure energy, like a glowing swarm of asteroids following the large comet
into the atmosphere to burn up while the comet continues serenely on
its course. And there is nothing anyone can do because this is the
course that was predestined millions of years ago, before mankind,
before emotions, before hatred and mercy were born. The bullet enters
the head, truncates mental activity and revokes dreams. In the core of
the cranium the last thought, a neural impulse from the pain centre, is
shattered. It is a last contradictory SOS to itself before everything is
silenced. I click onto the second video title. I stare out of the window
while the computer grinds away scouring the Internet night. There are
stars in the sky and I think that each of them is proof of the
ineluctability of fate. They make no sense; they are elevated above the
human need for logic and context. And that is why, I think, they are so
beautiful.

<start>
Harry would have preferred it if Fritz Bjelke from the Institute for
the Deaf and Dumb had not cycled quite as mercurially through the
city to assist them, but now he was standing in the doorway – a
gentle, rotund man with round glasses and a pink cycle helmet.
Bjelke was not deaf, and denitely not dumb. In order that he
could learn as much as possible about Stine Grette’s lip positions,
they played the rst part of the video tape where they could hear
what she said. While the tape was running, Bjelke talked non-stop.
‘ I am a specialist, but actually we are all lip-readers even though
we can hear what people say. That is why it is such an
uncomfortable feeling when the dubbing on lms is just hundredths
of a second out. ’
‘ Really, ’ Harry said. ‘ Personally, I can’t make anything out of
her lip movements. ' 

<start>
Astrid Monsen was forty-ve years old and made her living by
translating French literature in the study of her at in
Sorgenfrigata. She didn’t have a man in her life, but she had a tape
loop of a dog barking, which she put on at night. Harry heard her
steps and at least three locks being released behind the door before
it opened a fraction and a small, freckled face peered out from
beneath black curls.
‘ Ugh, ’ it exclaimed when it saw Harry’s towering frame.
The face may have been unfamiliar, but he had the immediate
sensation that he had met her before. Presumably because of
Anna’s detailed description of her ghastly neighbour.
‘ Harry Hole, Crime Squad, ’ he said, showing his card. ‘ I
apologise for disturbing you so late in the afternoon. I have a few
questions about the evening Anna Bethsen died. ’

<start>
At the roundabout between Byporten and Plaza Beate sneaked
into the space between a red bus and a Chevy van, straddling the
white line. When she came down the raised intersection known as
the trac machine doing 110 km/h and performed a controlled
skid on screaming tyres, into the hairpin bend on the fjord side of
Oslo Central station, Harry realised that all hope was not yet lost.
‘ Who was the mad bastard who taught you to drive? ’ he asked,
holding on tight as they swerved in and out between cars on the
three-lane motorway leading to Ekeberg tunnel.
‘ Self-taught, ’ Beate said.
In the middle of the Vålerenga tunnel a large, ugly, dieselvomiting
 lorry loomed up ahead of them. It lumbered into the
right-hand lane ; on the back, held in place by two yellow arms,
was a green skip bearing the words OSLO WASTE MANAGEMENT.

<start>
On leaving the building, Harry found a parking ticket under the
windscreen wiper. He took it and his bad mood with him to SS
Louise, which was in fact not a steamship but a restaurant in Aker
Brygge. Unlike at Schroder’s, they served edible food to solvent
customers with oce addresses in what somewhat charitably might
be called Oslo’s Wall Street. Harry had never felt completely at
home in Aker Brygge, but perhaps that was because he was O
slobred and not a tourist. He exchanged a few words with a waiter,
who pointed to a window table.
‘ Gentlemen, I am sorry to disturb, ’ Harry said.
‘ Ah, nally, ’ one of the three at the table exclaimed, icking his
fringe back. ‘Would you call this wine room temperature, waiter? ’
‘ I would call it Norwegian red wine decanted into a Clos des Papes
bottle,’ Harry said.
Taken aback, the Fringe ran his eye down Harry in his dark suit.
‘ A joke. ’ Harry smiled. ‘ I am a policeman. ’
The surprise segued into alarm.
‘ Not environmental crime. ’
Relief segued into question marks. Harry heard boyish laughter
and breathed in.

<start>
‘ First of all, I would like to explain the principle behind dye
cartridges, ’ Raskol said, beginning to unscrew Ivarsson’s white
pen, which happened to bear the Den norske Bank logo. ‘ As you
know, bank employees always add a dye cartridge to the money in
case they are raided. The cartridge is attached to money dispensers
in an ATM. Some cartridges are connected to a transmitter and are
activated by movement, being put in a bag for example. Others are
activated when they pass a portal which may be secured above the
main door of a bank. The cartridge may have a micro-transmitter
connected to a receiver which triggers an explosion when it is a
certain distance from the receiver, say, a hundred metres. Others
explode after an inbuilt time delay post-activation. The cartridge
itself can have all sorts of formats, but it has to be so small that it
can be hidden between notes. Some are this small. ’ Raskol held his
thumb and forenger two centimetres apart. ‘ The explosion is not
dangerous to the robber; the problem is the dye, the ink. ’

<start>
ELMER SCAMPERED DOWN GRONLANDSLEIRET WITH A QUICK greeting and smile to
customers and employees in neighbouring shops. He was annoyed
with himself. Once again he had run out of change and been
obliged to hang up a BACK SOON sign on the door while he nipped into
the bank.
He pulled open the door, strode into the bank, sang out his usual
‘ Good morning ’ and hurried over to take a ticket. No one
answered, but he was used to that by now – only white
Norwegians worked here. There was a man who seemed to be
repairing the ATM and the only customers he could see were
standing by the window over looking the street. It was unusually
quiet. Was something going on he hadn’t quite caught wind of?
‘ Twenty, ’ a woman’s voice called out. Elmer looked at the
number on his ticket. It said 51, but since all the positions were
closed, he went to the till where the woman’s voice came from.
‘ Hello, Catherine, my love, ’ he said, inquisitively peering
through the window. ‘Five rolls of ves and ones, please. ’

<start>
The fact that the longing could not have
been satised, even if she had lived, changes nothing. Everything about
her was impossible. Virtue and passion. Hair which seemed to absorb
all light, but instead shone like gold. The deant laughter as tears rolled
down her cheeks. The hate-lled eyes when I entered her. Her false
declarations of love and her genuine pleasure when I went to her with
threadbare excuses after broken agreements. Which were repeated as I
lay beside her in bed with my head in the imprint of another. That is a
long time ago now. Millions of years. I squeeze my eyes shut so as not
to see the continuation. The shot I red into her. Her pupils which
widened slowly like a black rose; the blood trickling out, falling and
landing with a weary sigh; the breaking of her neck and her head tipping
back. And now the woman I love is dead. As simple as that. But it still
doesn’t make sense. That is what is so beautiful. So simple and beautiful
you can hardly live with it. The pressure in the cabin falls and tensions
increase. From the inside. An invisible force pressing on my eardrums
and the soft brain. Something tells me this is how it will happen. No one
will nd me, no one will wrest my secret from me, but the plan will
explode anyway. From inside.

<start>
It was twelve o’clock and the Police HQ canteen was packed.
Harry clenched his teeth and went in. He didn’t dislike his
colleagues on principle; he disliked them by instinct. And, as the
years went by, it was getting worse.
‘ Completely normal paranoia, ’ Aune had called it. ‘ I feel the
same myself. I think all psychologists are after me, whereas in
reality it is probably no more than half of them. ’
Harry scanned the room and spotted Beate with her packed
lunch and the back of someone keeping her company. Harry tried
not to notice the looks he received from the tables he passed.
Someone mumbled a ‘ Hi ’, but Harry assumed it was meant
ironically and didn’t answer.
‘ Am I disturbing? ’ Beate looked up at Harry as if he had caught her in the act.

<start>
‘ We seemed to have been given a complete set of genes to share
between us. What he didn’t have, I had – and vice versa. We grew
up here in Disengrenda, in this house. Lev was a legend in the
area, but I was just Lev’s little brother. One of the rst things I can
remember was from school when Lev was balancing on the school
roof in the break. That was four oors up and none of the teachers
dared to bring him down. We stood below cheering while he
danced around with his arms out to the side. I can still see his body
against the blue sky. I was not frightened for a moment; it didn’t
even occur to me that my brother might fall o. I think everyone
felt like that. Lev was the only one who stood up to the Gausten
brothers from the ats in Traverveien, even though they were at
least two years older and had been in a youth detention centre.
Lev took Dad’s car when he was fourteen, drove to Lillestrøm and
came back with a bag of Twist which he had nicked from the station
kiosk. Dad didn’t know anything about it. Lev gave me the sweets. '

<start>
‘ The process of dying, much like the process of being born, is a
very intimate affair, ’ Aune said. ‘ The reason people in such
situations instinctively have a desire to hide is not just because
they feel physically vulnerable. Dying in the sight of others, as in a
public execution, is a double punishment as it is an affront to the
victim’s modesty in the most brutal way conceivable. It was one of
the reasons public executions were considered to have a more
criminally preventative eect on the population than execution in
the solitude of the cell. Some allowances were made, however, such
as obliging the executioner to wear a mask. That was not, as many
think, to conceal the executioner’s identity – everyone knew it was
the local butcher or rope-maker. The mask was out of
consideration for the condemned man, so that he didn’t feel a
stranger was close to him at the moment of death. ’
‘ Mm. The bank robber was also wearing a mask. ’

<start>
Today he had dragged himself to Muhammed’s at twelve and
taken an espresso and brandy before slowly walking back in the
quivering heat along the narrow pitted gravel track between the
small, low, relatively white houses. The house he and Roger rented
was one of the less white houses. The plaster was chipped, and
inside, the grey untreated walls were so permeated by the damp
wind blowing in o the Atlantic that you could taste the pungent
wall smell by sticking out your tongue. But then, why would you
do that, Fred mused. The house was good enough. Three bedrooms,
two mattresses, one refrigerator and one stove. Plus a sofa and a
tabletop on two Leca blocks in the room they dened as the sitting
room since it had an almost square hole in the wall which they
called a window. True enough, they should have cleaned up a bit
more often – the kitchen was infested with yellow re ants capable
of a terrifying bite – but Fred didn’t often go there after the
refrigerator was moved to the sitting room. He was lying on the
sofa planning his next move of the day when Roger came in.

<start>
Roger jumped when he heard the sudden sound of ushing water
from the bathroom. The guy had been sitting on the toilet! Roger
grabbed the pistol with both hands and with outstretched arms
pointed it at where he knew the bathroom door was. Five seconds
passed. Eight. Roger could not hold his breath any longer. What the
fuck was the guy waiting for? He had ushed. Twelve seconds.
Perhaps he had heard something. Perhaps he was trying to escape.
Roger remembered there was a little window in one wall.
This was his chance; he couldn’t let the guy get away. Roger crept
past the wardrobe containing the dressing gown which looked so
good on Petra, stood in front of the bathroom door and rested his
hand on the handle. Took a deep breath. He was about to press
when he felt a tiny draught. Not from a fan or an open window. It
was something else.

<start>
‘ Don’t call him that ! ’ Vigdis seemed to be trying to suck all the
tobacco out of the cigarette. ‘ Yes, Arne had money. He had enough
to buy this house, the furniture, the cars, the suits, the chalet and
the jewellery he gave me for no other reason than to show o in
front of all the so-called friends. The only thing that had any
meaning for Arne was what others thought of him, you see. His
family, my family, colleagues, neighbours and student friends. ’ The
anger gave her voice a harsh metallic timbre as though she were
talking through a mega phone. ‘ Everyone was a spectator to Arne
Albu’s fantastic life. They were meant to applaud when things
were going well. If Arne had put as much energy into running the
company as he did reaping plaudits, perhaps Albu AS would not
have gone downhill the way it did. ’

<start>
She had not left a number for him to ring back, to be told it was
all over and she wouldn’t need to keep looking over her shoulder
any more. He sighed and slumped into the green armchair. Closed
his eyes and saw her there. Rakel. The white sheet which was so
cold it burned his skin, the curtains which barely moved against
the open window and let in a strip of moonlight which fell on her
naked arm. He ran the tips of his fingers so gently across her eyes,
her hands, her narrow shoulders, her long, slim neck, her legs
entangled in his. He felt her calm, warm breath against his neck,
heard the breathing from the sleeping body imperceptibly change
rhythm as he gently caressed the small of her back. Her hips which
also imperceptibly began to move towards his as if she had only
been hibernating, waiting.

<start>
His hand hit the heavy crystal glass and it landed on the tiled
oor with a dull crunch.
Harry swore and stood up. He almost fell but caught the wall at
the last moment. He tied a thick, plush towel around his waist and
went into the living room. The gin bottle was still on the coee
table. He found a glass in the bar cabinet and lled it to the brim.
He could hear the coee machine. And Vigdis’s voice from the hall.
He went back into the bathroom and carefully placed the glass
beside the clothes Vigdis had laid out for him, a complete Bjorn
Borg collection in light blue and black. He cleaned the mirror with
the towel and confronted his eyes in the condensation-free strip.

<start>
‘ If I hear Rakel say anyone has so much as looked askance at
them, I will give myself up, put all my cards on the table and
nger you as the man behind Arne Albu’s murder. ’
Raskol gave him an indulgent, friendly smile. As if, on Harry’s
behalf, he regretted one thing they were both absolutely clear on –
the fact that no one would ever succeed in nding any link whatso
ever between Raskol and the murder. ‘ You don’t need to worry
about Rakel and Oleg, Spiuni. My contact was instructed to call o
his artisans the moment we had dealt with Albu. You should be
more concerned about the outcome of the trial. My contact says the
prospects don’t look too rosy. I understand the father’s family has
certain connections? ’ Harry hunched his shoulders.

<start>
‘ Forget it. Is there any other way of getting a copy? ’
‘ No. Trioving, who grind these keys, only receive orders from
authorised dealers like ourselves. And, as I said, we check the
documentation and keep an eye on keys ordered for all shared
property and housing co-ops. The system should be pretty secure. ’
‘ It sounds it, yes. ’ Harry rubbed his face with his hand in
irritation. ‘ I rang some time back and was told a woman living in
Sorgenfrigata had received three keys for her at. One we found in
her at, the second she gave to the electrician who was supposed
to be xing something and the third we found somewhere else. The
thing is, I don’t believe she ordered the third key. Can you check
that for me? '

<start>
‘ Your father was shot with an Uzi, six bullets in the chest.
According to the report he went inside the bank to negotiate, even
though he was alone, unarmed and thus had nothing to bargain
with. All he could hope to achieve was to make the robbers nervous
and aggressive. A huge blunder. Incomprehensible. Especially as
your father was legendary for his professionalism. In fact, he had a
colleague with him, a promising young ocer of whom great
things were expected, a prospective rising star. But he had never
experienced a live bank raid before and certainly not bank raiders
with decent shooters.

<start>
As I said before, we are ready enough to gossip in our village.
Everybody noticed from the first that Ackroyd and Mrs. Ferrars got on very
well together. After her husband’s death, the intimacy became more
marked. They were always seen about together, and it was freely
conjectured that at the end of her period of mourning, Mrs. Ferrars would
become Mrs. Roger Ackroyd. It was felt, indeed, that there was a certain
fitness in the thing. Roger Ackroyd’s wife had admittedly died of drink.
Ashley Ferrars had been a drunkard for many years before his death. It was
only fitting that these two victims of alcoholic excess should make up to
each other for all that they had previously endured at the hands of their
former spouses.

<start>
The house next door, The Larches, has recently been taken by a
stranger. To Caroline’s extreme annoyance, she has not been able to find out
anything about him, except that he is a foreigner. The Intelligence Corps
has proved a broken reed. Presumably the man has milk and vegetables and
joints of meat and occasional whitings just like everybody else, but none of
the people who make it their business to supply these things seem to have
acquired any information. His name, apparently, is Mr. Porrott—a name
which conveys an odd feeling of unreality. The one thing we do know about
him is that he is interested in the growing of vegetable marrows.

<start>
“ I was wondering. You are such an old friend of dear Roger’s. We know
how much he trusts to your judgment. So difficult for me—in my position
as poor Cecil’s widow. But there are so many tiresome things—settlements,
you know—all that. I fully believe that Roger intends to make settlements
upon dear Flora, but, as you know, he is just a leetle peculiar about money.
Very usual, I have heard, amongst men who are captains of industry. I
wondered, you know, if you could just sound him on the subject? Flora is so
fond of you. We feel you are quite an old friend, although we have only
really known you just over two years. ”

<start>
Parker interposed deferentially.
“ If you will excuse me, sir. If you were to lock the door into the main hall,
nobody could gain access to this part. That staircase leads only to Mr.
Ackroyd’s bedroom and bathroom. There is no communication with the
other part of the house. There once was a door through, but Mr. Ackroyd
had it blocked up. He liked to feel that his suite was entirely private. ”
To make things clear and explain the position, I have appended a rough
sketch of the right-hand wing of the house. The small staircase leads, as
Parker explained, to a big bedroom made by two being knocked into one,
and an adjoining bathroom and lavatory.

<start>
I wanted to tell Caroline that large numbers of murderers have had nice
manners, but the presence of Flora restrained me. Since the girl was
determined, I was forced to give in to her and we started at once, getting
away before my sister was able to fire off any more pronouncements
beginning with her favourite words, “ Of course. ”
An old woman with an immense Breton cap opened the door of The
Larches to us. M. Poirot was at home, it seemed.
We were ushered into a little sitting room arranged with formal
precision, and there, after a lapse of a minute or so, my friend of yesterday
came to us.

<start>
“ Everything is simple, if you arrange the facts methodically. We are
concerned now with the personality of the person who was with him at
nine-thirty last night. Everything goes to show that that was the individual
admitted by the window, and though Mr. Ackroyd was seen alive later by
Miss Flora, we cannot approach a solution of the mystery until we know
who that visitor was. The window may have been left open after his
departure and so afforded entrance to the murderer, or the same person may
have returned a second time. Ah! here is the colonel who returns. ”

<start>
“ That Russell woman. Something very queer about her, and so I have
always said. But Roger wouldn’t hear a word against her. Said she was a
woman of great force of character, and that he admired and respected her.
He was always going on about her rectitude and independence and moral
worth. I think there’s something fishy about her. She was certainly doing
her best to marry Roger. But I soon put a stop to that. She always hated me.
Naturally. I saw through her. ”
I began to wonder if there was any chance of stemming Mrs. Ackroyd’s
eloquence, and getting away.

<start>
I was slightly nervous when I rang the bell at Marby Grange the following
afternoon. I wondered very much what Poirot expected to find out. He had
entrusted the job to me. Why? Was it because, as in the case of questioning
Major Blunt, he wished to remain in the background? The wish, intelligible
in the first case, seemed to me quite meaningless here.
My meditations were interrupted by the advent of a smart parlourmaid.
Yes, Mrs. Folliott was at home. I was ushered into a big drawing room,
and looked round me curiously as I waited for the mistress of the house. A
large bare room, some good bits of old china, and some beautiful etchings,
shabby covers and curtains. A lady’s room in every sense of the term.

<start>
She sat down again at the table.
“ And now, messieurs et mesdames, ” said Poirot rapidly, “ I will continue
with what I was about to say. Understand this, I mean to arrive at the truth.
The truth, however ugly in itself, is always curious and beautiful to the
seeker after it. I am much aged, my powers may not be what they were. ”
Here he clearly expected a contradiction. “ In all probability this is the last
case I shall ever investigate. But Hercule Poirot does not end with a failure.
Messieurs et mesdames, I tell you, I mean to know. And I shall know — in
spite of you all. ”

<start>
After the evening talk I have just chronicled, the affair seemed to me to
enter on a different phase. The whole thing can be divided into two parts,
each clear and distinct from the other. Part I ranges from Ackroyd’s death
on the Friday evening to the following Monday night. It is the
straightforward narrative of what occurred, as presented to Hercule Poirot. I
was at Poirot’s elbow the whole time. I saw what he saw. I tried my best to
read his mind. As I know now, I failed in this latter task. Though Poirot
showed me all his discoveries — as, for instance, the gold wedding - ring — he
held back the vital and yet logical impressions that he formed. As I came to
know later, this secrecy was characteristic of him. He would throw out hints
and suggestions, but beyond that he would not go.

<start>
It occurred to me the next morning that under the exhilaration produced by
Tin-ho or the Perfect Winning, I might have been slightly indiscreet. True,
Poirot had not asked me to keep the discovery of the ring to myself. On the
other hand, he had said nothing about it whilst at Fernly, and as far as I
knew, I was the only person aware that it had been found. I felt distinctly
guilty. The fact was by now spreading through King’s Abbot like wildfire. I
was expecting wholesale reproaches from Poirot any minute.
The joint funeral of Mrs. Ferrars and Roger Ackroyd was fixed for
eleven o’clock. It was a melancholy and impressive ceremony. All the party
from Fernly were there.

<start>
Poirot nodded as though satisfied, and made his way out through the
door. He was joined presently by the two officers.
“ We will verify that statement, ” remarked Raglan. “ I don’t think he’s
lying, though. But he has got to come clean with a statement as to what he
was doing at Fernly. It looks to me as though we had got our blackmailer all
right. On the other hand, granted his story’s correct, he couldn’t have had
anything to do with the actual murder. He had got ten pounds on him when he
was arrested — rather a large sum. I fancy that forty pounds went to him —
the numbers of the notes didn’t correspond, but of course he’d have
changed them first thing. Mr. Ackroyd must have given him the money, and
he made off with it as fast as possible. What was that about Kent being his
birthplace? What’s that got to do with it? ”

<start>
Although a tough teacher and strict disciplinarian, Langdon was the first to
embrace what he hailed as the “lost art of good clean fun. ” He relished
recreation with an infectious fanaticism that had earned him a fraternal
acceptance among his students. His campus nickname — “ The Dolphin ” — was
a reference both to his affable nature and his legendary ability to dive into a
pool and outmaneuver the entire opposing squad in a water polo match.
As Langdon sat alone, absently gazing into the darkness, the silence of his
home was shattered again, this time by the ring of his fax machine. Too
exhausted to be annoyed, Langdon forced a tired chuckle.

<start>
The craft before them was enormous. It was vaguely reminiscent of the space
shuttle except that the top had been shaved off, leaving it perfectly flat. Parked
there on the runway, it resembled a colossal wedge. Langdon’s first impression
was that he must be dreaming. The vehicle looked as airworthy as a Buick.
The wings were practically nonexistent—just two stubby fins on the rear of the
fuselage. A pair of dorsal guiders rose out of the aft section. The rest of the
plane was hull—about 200 feet from front to back — no windows, nothing but
hull.

<start>
Langdon’s aversion to closed spaces was by no means debilitating, but it had
always frustrated him. It manifested itself in subtle ways. He avoided enclosed
sports like racquetball or squash, and he had gladly paid a small fortune for his
airy, high-ceilinged Victorian home even though economical faculty housing
was readily available. Langdon had often suspected his attraction to the art
world as a young boy sprang from his love of museums’ wide open spaces.
The engines roared to life beneath him, sending a deep shudder through the
hull. Langdon swallowed hard and waited. He felt the plane start taxiing.
Piped-in country music began playing quietly overhead.

<start>
As the killer walked, he imagined his ancestors smiling down on him. Today
he was fighting their battle, he was fighting the same enemy they had fought for
ages, as far back as the eleventh century . . . when the enemy’s crusading
armies had first pillaged his land, raping and killing his people, declaring them
unclean, defiling their temples and gods.
His ancestors had formed a small but deadly army to defend themselves.
The army became famous across the land as protectors—skilled executioners
who wandered the countryside slaughtering any of the enemy they could find.
They were renowned not only for their brutal killings, but also for celebrating
their slayings by plunging themselves into drug-induced stupors.

<start>
The sentry arched his eyebrows. He turned and checked a computer
printout, verifying it against the data on his computer screen. Then he
returned to the window. “ Enjoy your stay, Mr. Langdon. ”
The car shot off again, accelerating another 200 yards around a sweeping
rotary that led to the facility’s main entrance. Looming before them was a
rectangular, ultramodern structure of glass and steel. Langdon was amazed by
the building’s striking transparent design. He had always had a fond love of
architecture.

<start>
Overhead, the bluish glass roof shimmered in the afternoon sun, casting
rays of geometric patterns in the air and giving the room a sense of grandeur.
Angular shadows fell like veins across the white tiled walls and down to the
marble floors. The air smelled clean, sterile. A handful of scientists moved
briskly about, their footsteps echoing in the resonant space.

<start>
Langdon felt a sudden chill realizing that he was about to see a dead body.
His stomach had never been particularly stalwart. It was a weakness he had
discovered as an art student when the teacher informed the class that
Leonardo da Vinci had gained his expertise in the human form by exhuming
corpses and dissecting their musculature.
Kohler led the way to the far end of the hallway. There was a single door.
“ The Penthouse, as you would say, ” Kohler announced, dabbing a bead of
perspiration from his forehead.

<start>
The corpse on the floor before Langdon was hideous. The late Leonardo Vetra
lay on his back, stripped naked, his skin bluish-gray. His neck bones were
jutting out where they had been broken, and his head was twisted completely
backward, pointing the wrong way. His face was out of view, pressed against
the floor. The man lay in a frozen puddle of his own urine, the hair around his
shriveled genitals spidered with frost.

<start>
“ Of course, the Illuminati were hunted ruthlessly by the Catholic Church.
Only through rites of extreme secrecy did the scientists remain safe. Word
spread through the academic underground, and the Illuminati brotherhood
grew to include academics from all over Europe. The scientists met regularly
in Rome at an ultrasecret lair they called the Church of Illumination. ”
Kohler coughed and shifted in his chair.
“ Many of the Illuminati, ” Langdon continued, “wanted to combat the
church’s tyranny with acts of violence, but their most revered member
persuaded them against it. He was a pacifist, as well as one of history’s most
famous scientists. ”

<start>
The Hassassin smirked. He had been awake all night, but sleep was the last
thing on his mind. Sleep was for the weak. He was a warrior like his ancestors
before him, and his people never slept once a battle had begun. This battle had
most definitely begun, and he had been given the honor of spilling first blood.
Now he had two hours to celebrate his glory before going back to work.
Sleep? There are far better ways to relax.
An appetite for hedonistic pleasure was something bred into him by his
ancestors. His ascendants had indulged in hashish, but he preferred a different
kind of gratification. He took pride in his body—a well-tuned, lethal machine,
which, despite his heritage, he refused to pollute with narcotics. He had
developed a more nourishing addiction than drugs. a far more healthy and
satisfying reward.

<start>
“ Absolutely not. The Masons fell victim of their own benevolence. After
harboring the fleeing scientists in the 1700s, the Masons unknowingly became
a front for the Illuminati. The Illuminati grew within their ranks, gradually
taking over positions of power within the lodges. They quietly reestablished
their scientific brotherhood deep within the Masons—a kind of secret society
within a secret society. Then the Illuminati used the worldwide connection of
Masonic lodges to spread their influence. ”

<start>
When the elevator thumped to a stop, Langdon was relieved to feel terra
firma beneath his feet. But when the doors slid open, his relief evaporated.
Robert Langdon found himself standing once again in a totally alien world.
The passageway stretched out indefinitely in both directions, left and right.
It was a smooth cement tunnel, wide enough to allow passage of an eighteen
wheeler. Brightly lit where they stood, the corridor turned pitch black farther
down. A damp wind rustled out of the darkness—an unsettling reminder that
they were now deep in the earth.

<start>
Not many children could say they remembered the day they met their father,
but Vittoria Vetra could. She was eight years old, living where she always had,
Orfanotrofio di Siena, a Catholic orphanage near Florence, deserted by parents
she never knew. It was raining that day. The nuns had called for her twice to
come to dinner, but as always she pretended not to hear. She lay outside in the
courtyard, staring up at the raindrops. feeling them hit her body. trying
to guess where one would land next. The nuns called again, threatening that
pneumonia might make an insufferably headstrong child a lot less curious
about nature.

<start>
Vittoria walked across the room and retrieved a large electronic apparatus.
The contraption reminded Langdon of some sort of cartoon ray gun — a wide
cannonlike barrel with a sighting scope on top and a tangle of electronics
dangling below. Vittoria aligned the scope with one of the canisters, peered
into the eyepiece, and calibrated some knobs. Then she stepped away, offering
Kohler a look.

<start>
The object was not on the bottom of the container as he expected, but
rather it was floating in the center—suspended in midair—a shimmering
globule of mercurylike liquid. Hovering as if by magic, the liquid tumbled in
space. Metallic wavelets rippled across the droplet’s surface. The suspended
fluid reminded Langdon of a video he had once seen of a water droplet in zero
G. Although he knew the globule was microscopic, he could see every
changing gorge and undulation as the ball of plasma rolled slowly in
suspension.

<start>
Instantly, Langdon was blinded. A brilliant point of light shone in the
canister and then exploded outward in a shock wave of light that radiated in all
directions, erupting against the window before him with thunderous force. He
stumbled back as the detonation rocked the vault. The light burned bright for a
moment, searing, and then, after an instant, it rushed back inward, absorbing
in on itself, and collapsing into a tiny speck that disappeared to nothing.
Langdon blinked in pain, slowly recovering his eyesight. He squinted into the
smoldering chamber. The canister on the floor had entirely disappeared.
Vaporized. Not a trace.

<start>
talking. Then Kohler rolled out again. He hadn’t been back since.
Sylvie had decided to ignore the antics as yet another Kohlerian
melodrama, but she began to get concerned when Kohler failed to return at
the proper time for his daily injections; the director’s physical condition
required regular treatment, and when he decided to push his luck, the results
were never pretty—respiratory shock, coughing fits, and a mad dash by the
infirmary personnel. Sometimes Sylvie thought Maximilian Kohler had a
death wish.

<start>
Langdon emerged from his daydream and looked up. Vittoria was sitting
across the aisle. Even in the stark fluorescent light of the cabin, there was an
aura of composure about her — an almost magnetic radiance of wholeness. Her
breathing seemed deeper now, as if a spark of self-preservation had ignited
within her. a craving for justice and retribution, fueled by a daughter’s love.
Vittoria had not had time to change from her shorts and sleeveless top, and
her tawny legs were now goose-bumped in the cold of the plane. Instinctively
Langdon removed his jacket and offered it to her

<start>
After parking the cart on the wide lawn directly behind St. Peter’s Basilica, the
guard escorted Langdon and Vittoria up a stone escarpment to a marble plaza
off the back of the basilica. Crossing the plaza, they approached the rear wall
of the basilica and followed it through a triangular courtyard, across Via
Belvedere, and into a series of buildings closely huddled together. Langdon’s
art history had taught him enough Italian to pick out signs for the Vatican
Printing Office, the Tapestry Restoration Lab, Post Office Management, and
the Church of St. Ann. They crossed another small square and arrived at their
destination

<start>
The Camerlengo was nothing like the images of frail, beatific old men
Langdon usually imagined roaming the Vatican. He wore no rosary beads or
pendants. No heavy robes. He was dressed instead in a simple black cassock
that seemed to amplify the solidity of his substantial frame. He looked to be in
his late-thirties, indeed a child by Vatican standards. He had a surprisingly
handsome face, a swirl of coarse brown hair, and almost radiant green eyes
that shone as if they were somehow fueled by the mysteries of the universe. As
the man drew nearer, though, Langdon saw in his eyes a profound exhaustion
— like a soul who had been through the toughest fifteen days of his life

<start>
His glance shifted to the other side of the carriage. At the far end, against the
wall, was a middle-aged woman dressed in black with a broad, expressionless
face. German or Scandinavian, he thought. Probably the German lady’s maid.
Beyond her were a couple leaning forward and talking animatedly together.
The man wore English clothes of loose tweed, but he was not English. Though
only the back of his head was visible to Poirot, the shape of it and the set of the
shoulders betrayed him. A big man, well made. He turned his head suddenly and
Poirot saw his profile. A very handsome man of thirty-odd with a big fair
moustache.

<start>
He found it difficult to go to sleep again at once. For one thing he missed the
motion of the train. If it was a station outside, it was curiously quiet. By contrast
the noises on the train seemed unusually loud. He could hear Ratchett moving
about next door – a click as he pulled down the washbasin, the sound of the tap
running, a splashing noise, then another click as the basin shut to again.
Footsteps passed up the corridor outside, the shuffling footsteps of someone in
bedroom slippers.

<start>
“ Perfectly, ” said Poirot. “ The matter begins to clear itself up wonderfully !
The murderer was a man of great strength – he was feeble – it was a woman – it
was a right-handed person – it was a left-handed person.
He spoke with sudden anger. “And the victim – what does he do in all this?
Does he cry out? Does he struggle? Does he defend himself? ”
He slipped his hand under the pillow and drew out the automatic pistol
which Ratchett had shown him the day before.

<start>
“ Well, to give you an example – we find a woman’s handkerchief. Did a
woman drop it? Or did a man, committing the crime, say to himself: ‘I will make
this look like a woman’s crime. I will stab my enemy an unnecessary number of
times, making some of the blows feeble and ineffective, and I will drop this
handkerchief where no one can miss it ? That is one possibility. Then there is
another. Did a woman kill him, and did she deliberately drop a pipe-cleaner to
make it look like a man’s work? Or are we seriously to suppose that two people,
a man and a woman, were separately concerned, and that each was so careless as
to drop a clue to his or her identity? It is a little too much of a coincidence, that! ”

<start>
“ That is quite easy. I went back to my compartment, read a bit, got out on the
platform at Belgrade, decided it was too cold, and got in again. I talked for a
while to a young English lady who is in the compartment next to mine. Then I
fell into conversation with that Englishman, Colonel Arbuthnot – as a matter of
fact I think you passed us as we were talking. Then I went in to Mr. Ratchett and,
as I told you, took down some memoranda of letters he wanted written. I said
good tight to him and left him. Colonel Arbuthnot was still standing in the
corridor. His compartment was already made up for the night, so I suggested that
he should come along to mine. I ordered a couple of drinks and we got right
down to it. Discussed world politics and the Government of India and our own
troubles with Prohibition and the Wall Street crisis. I don’t as a rule cotton to
Britishers – they’re a stiff-necked lot – but I liked this one. ”

<start>
“ I just don’t know what is the matter with all you people. Seems as though
you don’t want to do anything but make objections. Now listen here. I was
reading a magazine last night before I went to sleep. Before I turned the light
out, I placed that magazine on a little case that was standing on the floor near the
window. Have you got that? ”
They assured her that they had.

<start>
“ All this is by the way, ” he said. “Let us be practical and come to facts. This
crime, we have reason to believe, took place at a quarter past one last night. It is
part of the necessary routine to ask everyone on the train what he or she was
doing at that time. ”
“ Quite so. At a quarter past one, to the best of my belief, I was talking to the
young American fellow-secretary to the dead man. ”
“ Ah! were you in his compartment, or was he in yours? ”

<start>
“ You are, I think, a little bit contemptuous of the way I prosecute my
inquiries, ” he said with a twinkle. “ Not so, you think, would an English inquiry
be conducted. There everything would be cut and dried – it would be all kept to
the facts – a well-ordered business. But I, Mademoiselle, have my little
originalities. I look first at my witness, I sum up his or her character, and I frame
my questions accordingly. just a little minute ago I am asking questions of a
gentleman who wants to tell me all his ideas on every subject. Well, him I keep
strictly to the point. I want him to answer yes or no. This or that. And then you
come. I see at once that you will be orderly and methodical. You will confine
yourself to the matter in hand. Your answers will be brief and to the point. And
because, Mademoiselle, human nature is perverse, I ask of you quite different
questions. I ask what you feel, what you think. It does not please you, this
method? ”

<start>
“ To begin with, let us examine the evidence carefully. We first hear of the
existence of this man – the small dark man with a womanish voice – from the
man Hardman. He says that Ratchett told him of this person and employed him
to watch out for the man. There is no evidence to support this ; we have only
Hardman’s word for it. Let us next examine the question : Is Hardman the person
he pretends to be an operative of a New York detective agency?

<start>
Hanging on the handle of the door that gave access to the next compartment
was a large-checked rubber sponge-bag. Below it on the floor, just where it had
fallen from Mrs. Hubbard’s hand, was a straight-bladed dagger – a cheap affair,
sham Oriental with an embossed hilt and a tapering blade. The blade was stained
with patches of what looked like rust.
Poirot picked it up delicately.

<start>
“ That is so, and he saw me on board a French Messageries boat for Smyrna,
and my daughter’s husband was waiting right on the quay. What he will say when
he hears about all this! My daughter said this would be just the safest, easiest
way imaginable. ‘ You just sit in your carriage, ’ she said, ‘ and you land right in
Parrus, and there the American Express will meet you. ’ And, oh, dear, what am I
to do about cancelling my steamship passage? I ought to let them know. I can’t
possibly make it now. This is just too terrible ”

<start>
“ If you permit, Mademoiselle, we will examine your baggage first, and then
perhaps you would be so good as to see how the American lady is getting on. We
have moved her into one of the carriages in the next coach, but she is still very
much upset as the result of her discovery. I have ordered coffee to be sent to her,
but I think she is of those to whom someone to talk to is a necessity of the first
order. ”

<start>
The woman was standing in readiness, her face respectful but unemotional.
Poirot took a quick glance through the contents of the small case on the seat.
Then he motioned to the attendant to get down the bigger suitcase from the rack.

<start>
“ We must also pay a little attention to the time the intruder entered the
compartment. When had he an opportunity of doing so? Unless we are to assume
the complicity of the real conductor, there was only one time when he could
have done so – during the time the train stopped at Vincovci. After the train left
Vincovci the conductor was sitting facing the corridor, and whereas any one of
the passengers would pay little attention to a Wagon Lit attendant, the one
person who would notice an impostor is the real conductor. But during the halt at
Vincovci the conductor is out on the platform. The coast is clear. ”

<start>
“ Then we confess ourselves beaten there. The next question has, at any rate,
possibilities. Who was the man or the woman masquerading in Wagon Lit
uniform? Well, one can list with certainty a number of people that it could not
have been. Hardman, Colonel Arbuthnot, Foscarelli, Count Andrenyi and Hector
MacQueen are all too tall. Mrs. Hubbard, Hildegarde Schmidt and Greta Ohlsson
are too broad. That leaves the valet, Miss Debenham, Princess Dragomiroff and
Countess Andrenyi – and none of them sounds likely! Greta Ohlsson in one case,
and Antonio Foscarelli in the other, both swear that Miss Debenham and the
valet never left their compartments. Hildegarde Schmidt swears that the Princess
was in hers, and Count Andrenyi has told us that his wife took a sleeping
draught. Therefore it seems impossible that it can be anybody – which is
absurd! ”

<start>
“ I have not completely neglected that point, ” said Poirot. “ You may have
noticed that I made each passenger write either a signature or an address. That is
not conclusive, because some people do certain actions with the right hand and
others with the left. Some write right-handed, but play golf left-handed. Still, it
is something. Every person questioned took the pen in his or her right hand –
with the exception of Princess Dragomiroff, who refused to write. ”

<start>
“ Assuredly I must think. But as far as that goes I have already thought.
Poirot obviously thinks that this English girl is mixed up in the matter. I cannot
help feeling that that is most unlikely. The English are extremely cold.
Probably it is because they have no figures. But that is not the point. It seems
that the Italian could not have done it – a pity. I suppose the English valet is not
lying when he said the other never left the compartment? But why should he! It
is not easy to bribe the English; they are so unapproachable. The whole thing is
most unfortunate. I wonder when we shall get out of this. There must be some
rescue work in progress. They are so slow in these countries… it is hours before
anyone thinks of doing anything. And the police of these countries, they will be
most trying to deal with – puffed up with importance, touchy, on their dignity.
They will make a grand affair of all this. It is not often that such a chance comes
their way. It will be in all the newspapers ”

<start>
Certainly there is. Suppose, for instance, that you have committed a crime
and wish to cast the blame for it on someone else. Well, there is on the train a
certain person connected intimately with the Armstrong family – a woman.
Suppose, then, that you leave there a handkerchief belonging to that woman. She
will be questioned, her connection with the Armstrong family will be brought
out – et voila: motive – and an incriminating article of evidence.

<start>
“ But in such a case, ” objected the doctor, “ the person indicated, being
innocent, would not take steps to conceal her identity. ”
“ Ah, really? That is what you think? That is, truly, the opinion of the police
court. But I know human nature, my friend, and I tell you that, suddenly
confronted with the possibility of being tried for murder, the most innocent
person will lose his head and do the most absurd things. No, no, the grease spot
and the changed label do not prove guilt – they only prove that the Countess
Andrenyi is anxious for some reason to conceal her identity. ”

<start>
“ Monsieur Poirot, ” the Count said earnestly and passionately, “ consider my
position. Do you think I could stand the thought of my wife dragged through a
sordid police case? She was innocent, I knew it, but what she said was true –
because of her connection with the Armstrong family she would have been“What is that you are saying? Why, that little one – she was the delight of the
house. Tonio, she called me. And she would sit in the car and pretend to hold the
wheel. All the household worshipped her! Even the police came to understand
that. Ah, the beautiful little one!”
immediately suspected. She would have been questioned – attested, perhaps.
Since some evil chance had taken us on the same train as this man Ratchett,
there was, I felt sure, but one thing for it. I admit, Monsieur, that I lied to you –
all, that is, save in one thing. My wife never left her compartment last night. ”

##############################################################
<start>
The Time Traveller (for so it will be convenient to speak of
him) was expounding a recondite matter to us. His grey eyes
shone and twinkled, and his usually pale face was flushed
and animated. The fire burned brightly, and the soft
radiance of the incandescent lights in the lilies of silver
caught the bubbles that flashed and passed in our glasses.
Our chairs, being his patents, embraced and caressed us
rather than submitted to be sat upon, and there was that
luxurious after-dinner atmosphere when thought roams
gracefully free of the trammels of precision. And he put it to
us in this way—marking the points with a lean forefinger—as
we sat and lazily admired his earnestness over this new
paradox ( as we thought it ) and his fecundity

<start>
Filby became pensive. “Clearly,” the Time Traveller
proceeded, “any real body must have extension in four
directions: it must have Length, Breadth, Thickness, and—
Duration. But through a natural infirmity of the flesh, which I
will explain to you in a moment, we incline to overlook this
fact. There are really four dimensions, three which we call
the three planes of Space, and a fourth, Time. There is,
however, a tendency to draw an unreal distinction between
the former three dimensions and the latter, because it
happens that our consciousness moves intermittently in one
direction along the latter from the beginning to the end of
our lives.”

<start>
“That,” said a very young man, making spasmodic efforts
to relight his cigar over the lamp; “that… very clear indeed.”
“Now, it is very remarkable that this is so extensively
overlooked,” continued the Time Traveller, with a slight
accession of cheerfulness. “Really this is what is meant by
the Fourth Dimension, though some people who talk about
the Fourth Dimension do not know they mean it. It is only
another way of looking at Time. There is no difference
between Time and any of the three dimensions of Space
except that our consciousness moves along it. But some
foolish people have got hold of the wrong side of that idea.
You have all heard what they have to say about this Fourth
Dimension?”

<start>
“It is simply this. That Space, as our mathematicians have
it, is spoken of as having three dimensions, which one may
call Length, Breadth, and Thickness, and is always definable
by reference to three planes, each at right angles to the
others. But some philosophical people have been asking
why three dimensions particularly—why not another
direction at right angles to the other three?—and have even
tried to construct a Four-Dimension geometry. Professor
Simon Newcomb was expounding this to the New York
Mathematical Society only a month or so ago. You know how
on a flat surface, which has only two dimensions, we can
represent a figure of a three-dimensional solid, and similarly
they think that by models of three dimensions they could
represent one of four—if they could master the perspective
of the thing. See?”

<start>
“I think so,” murmured the Provincial Mayor; and, knitting
his brows, he lapsed into an introspective state, his lips
moving as one who repeats mystic words. “Yes, I think I see
it now,” he said after some time, brightening in a quite
transitory manner.
“Well, I do not mind telling you I have been at work upon
this geometry of Four Dimensions for some time. Some of my
results are curious. For instance, here is a portrait of a man
at eight years old, another at fifteen, another at seventeen,
another at twenty-three, and so on. All these are evidently
sections, as it were, Three-Dimensional representations of
his Four-Dimensioned being, which is a fixed and unalterable
thing.

<start>
“But,” said the Medical Man, staring hard at a coal in the
fire, “if Time is really only a fourth dimension of Space, why
is it, and why has it always been, regarded as something
different? And why cannot we move in Time as we move
about in the other dimensions of Space?”
The Time Traveller smiled. “Are you sure we can move
freely in Space? Right and left we can go, backward and
forward freely enough, and men always have done so. I
admit we move freely in two dimensions. But how about up
and down? Gravitation limits us there.”
“Not exactly,” said the Medical Man. “There are balloons.”
“But before the balloons, save for spasmodic jumping and
the inequalities of the surface, man had no freedom of
vertical movement.”

<start>
“Still they could move a little up and down,” said the
Medical Man.
“Easier, far easier down than up.”
“And you cannot move at all in Time, you cannot get away
from the present moment.”
“My dear sir, that is just where you are wrong. That is just
where the whole world has gone wrong. We are always
getting away from the present moment. Our mental
existences, which are immaterial and have no dimensions,
are passing along the Time-Dimension with a uniform
velocity from the cradle to the grave. Just as we should
travel down if we began our existence fifty miles above the
earth’s surface.”
“But the great difficulty is this,” interrupted the
Psychologist. “You can move about in all directions of Space,
but you cannot move about in Time.”

<start>
The Time Traveller smiled round at us. Then, still smiling
faintly, and with his hands deep in his trousers pockets, he
walked slowly out of the room, and we heard his slippers
shuffling down the long passage to his laboratory.
The Psychologist looked at us. “I wonder what he’s got?”
“Some sleight-of-hand trick or other,” said the Medical
Man, and Filby tried to tell us about a conjurer he had seen
at Burslem; but before he had finished his preface the Time
Traveller came back, and Filby’s anecdote collapsed

<start>
The thing the Time Traveller held in his hand was a
glittering metallic framework, scarcely larger than a small
clock, and very delicately made. There was ivory in it, and
some transparent crystalline substance. And now I must be
explicit, for this that follows—unless his explanation is to be
accepted — is an absolutely unaccountable thing. He took
one of the small octagonal tables that were scattered about
the room, and set it in front of the fire, with two legs on the
hearthrug. On this table he placed the mechanism. Then he
drew up a chair, and sat down. The only other object on the
table was a small shaded lamp, the bright light of which fell
upon the model.

<start>
There were also perhaps a dozen candles
about, two in brass candlesticks upon the mantel and
several in sconces, so that the room was brilliantly
illuminated. I sat in a low armchair nearest the fire, and I
drew this forward so as to be almost between the Time
Traveller and the fireplace. Filby sat behind him, looking
over his shoulder. The Medical Man and the Provincial Mayor
watched him in profile from the right, the Psychologist from
the left. The Very Young Man stood behind the Psychologist.
We were all on the alert. It appears incredible to me that any
kind of trick, however subtly conceived and however adroitly
done, could have been played upon us under these
conditions.

<start>
The Time Traveller looked at us, and then at the
mechanism. “Well?” said the Psychologist.
“This little affair,” said the Time Traveller, resting his
elbows upon the table and pressing his hands together
above the apparatus, “is only a model. It is my plan for a
machine to travel through time. You will notice that it looks
singularly askew, and that there is an odd twinkling
appearance about this bar, as though it was in some way
unreal.” He pointed to the part with his finger. “Also, here is
one little white lever, and here is another.”
The Medical Man got up out of his chair and peered into
the thing. “It’s beautifully made,” he said.
“It took two years to make,” retorted the Time Traveller.
Then, when we had all imitated the action of the Medical
Man, he said: “Now I want you clearly to understand that
this lever, being pressed over, sends the machine gliding
into the future, and this other reverses the motion. This
saddle represents the seat of a time traveller. Presently I am
going to press the lever, and off the machine will go. It will
vanish, pass into future Time, and disappear. Have a good
look at the thing. Look at the table too, and satisfy
yourselves there is no trickery. I don’t want to waste this
model, and then be told I’m a quack.”

<start>
There was a minute’s pause perhaps. The Psychologist
seemed about to speak to me, but changed his mind. Then
the Time Traveller put forth his finger towards the lever.
“No,” he said suddenly. “Lend me your hand.” And turning to
the Psychologist, he took that individual’s hand in his own
and told him to put out his forefinger. So that it was the
Psychologist himself who sent forth the model Time Machine
on its interminable voyage. We all saw the lever turn. I am
absolutely certain there was no trickery. There was a breath
of wind, and the lamp flame jumped. One of the candles on
the mantel was blown out, and the little machine suddenly
swung round, became indistinct, was seen as a ghost for a
second perhaps, as an eddy of faintly glittering brass and
ivory; and it was gone—vanished! Save for the lamp the
table was bare.

<start>
Everyone was silent for a minute. Then Filby said he was
damned.
The Psychologist recovered from his stupor, and suddenly
looked under the table. At that the Time Traveller laughed
cheerfully. “Well?” he said, with a reminiscence of the
Psychologist. Then, getting up, he went to the tobacco jar on
the mantel, and with his back to us began to fill his pipe.
We stared at each other. “Look here,” said the Medical
Man, “are you in earnest about this? Do you seriously
believe that that machine has travelled into time?”
“Certainly,” said the Time Traveller, stooping to light a spill
at the fire. Then he turned, lighting his pipe, to look at the
Psychologist’s face. ( The Psychologist, to show that he was
not unhinged, helped himself to a cigar and tried to light it
uncut. ) “What is more, I have a big machine nearly finished
in there”—he indicated the laboratory– “and when that is put
together I mean to have a journey on my own account.”
“You mean to say that that machine has travelled into the
future?” said Filby

<start>
“Of course,” said the Psychologist, and reassured us.
“That’s a simple point of psychology. I should have thought
of it. It’s plain enough, and helps the paradox delightfully.
We cannot see it, nor can we appreciate this machine, any
more than we can the spoke of a wheel spinning, or a bullet
flying through the air. If it is travelling through time fifty
times or a hundred times faster than we are, if it gets
through a minute while we get through a second, the
impression it creates will of course be only one-fiftieth or
one-hundredth of what it would make if it were not travelling
in time. That’s plain enough.” He passed his hand through
the space in which the machine had been. “You see?” he
said, laughing.


<start>
“Would you like to see the Time Machine itself?” asked the
Time Traveller. And therewith, taking the lamp in his hand,
he led the way down the long, draughty corridor to his
laboratory. I remember vividly the flickering light, his queer,
broad head in silhouette, the dance of the shadows, how we
all followed him, puzzled but incredulous, and how there in
the laboratory we beheld a larger edition of the little
mechanism which we had seen vanish from before our eyes.
Parts were of nickel, parts of ivory, parts had certainly been
filed or sawn out of rock crystal. The thing was generally
complete, but the twisted crystalline bars lay unfinished
upon the bench beside some sheets of drawings, and I took
one up for a better look at it. Quartz it seemed to be.


<start>
I think that at that time none of us quite believed in the
Time Machine. The fact is, the Time Traveller was one of
those men who are too clever to be believed: you never felt
that you saw all round him; you always suspected some
subtle reserve, some ingenuity in ambush, behind his lucid
frankness. Had Filby shown the model and explained the
matter in the Time Traveller’s words, we should have shown
him far less scepticism. For we should have perceived his
motives; a pork butcher could understand Filby. But the
Time Traveller had more than a touch of whim among his
elements, and we distrusted him. Things that would have
made the frame of a less clever man seemed tricks in his
hands. It is a mistake to do things too easily. The serious
people who took him seriously never felt quite sure of his
deportment; they were somehow aware that trusting their
reputations for judgment with him was like furnishing a
nursery with eggshell china. So I don’t think any of us said
very much about time travelling in the interval between that
Thursday and the next, though its odd potentialities ran, no
doubt, in most of our minds: its plausibility, that is, its
practical incredibleness, the curious possibilities of
anachronism and of utter confusion it suggested. 

<start>
The Psychologist was the only person besides the Doctor
and myself who had attended the previous dinner. The other
men were Blank, the Editor aforementioned, a certain
journalist, and another—a quiet, shy man with a beard—
whom I didn’t know, and who, as far as my observation went,
never opened his mouth all the evening. There was some
speculation at the dinner-table about the Time Traveller’s
absence, and I suggested time travelling, in a half-jocular
spirit. The Editor wanted that explained to him, and the
Psychologist volunteered a wooden account of the
“ingenious paradox and trick” we had witnessed that day
week. He was in the midst of his exposition when the door
from the corridor opened slowly and without noise. I was
facing the door, and saw it first. “Hallo!” I said. “At last!” And
the door opened wider, and the Time Traveller stood before
us. I gave a cry of surprise. “Good heavens! man, what’s the
matter?” cried the Medical Man, who saw him next. And the
whole tableful turned towards the door.

<start>
He was in an amazing plight. His coat was dusty and dirty,
and smeared with green down the sleeves; his hair
disordered, and as it seemed to me greyer—either with dust
and dirt or because its colour had actually faded. His face
was ghastly pale; his chin had a brown cut on it—a cut half
healed; his expression was haggard and drawn, as by
intense suffering. For a moment he hesitated in the
doorway, as if he had been dazzled by the light. Then he
came into the room. He walked with just such a limp as I
have seen in footsore tramps. We stared at him in silence,
expecting him to speak.


<start>
He said not a word, but came painfully to the table, and
made a motion towards the wine. The Editor filled a glass of
champagne, and pushed it towards him. He drained it, and it
seemed to do him good: for he looked round the table, and
the ghost of his old smile flickered across his face. “What on
earth have you been up to, man?” said the Doctor. The Time
Traveller did not seem to hear. “Don’t let me disturb you,” he
said, with a certain faltering articulation. “I’m all right.” He
stopped, held out his glass for more, and took it off at a
draught. “That’s good,” he said. His eyes grew brighter, and
a faint colour came into his cheeks. His glance flickered over
our faces with a certain dull approval, and then went round
the warm and comfortable room. Then he spoke again, still
as it were feeling his way among his words. “I’m going to
wash and dress, and then I’ll come down and explain
things… Save me some of that mutton. I’m starving for a bit
of meat.”

<start>
“Agreed,” said the Editor, and the rest of us echoed
“Agreed.” And with that the Time Traveller began his story as
I have set it forth. He sat back in his chair at first, and spoke
like a weary man. Afterwards he got more animated. In
writing it down I feel with only too much keenness the
inadequacy of pen and ink—and, above all, my own
inadequacy—to express its quality. You read, I will suppose,
attentively enough; but you cannot see the speaker’s white,
sincere face in the bright circle of the little lamp, nor hear
the intonation of his voice. You cannot know how his
expression followed the turns of his story! Most of us hearers
were in shadow, for the candles in the smoking-room had
not been lighted, and only the face of the Journalist and the
legs of the Silent Man from the knees downward were
illuminated. At first we glanced now and again at each other.
After a time we ceased to do that, and looked only at the
Time Traveller’s face.

<start>
“I told some of you last Thursday of the principles of the
Time Machine, and showed you the actual thing itself,
incomplete in the workshop. There it is now, a little travelworn, truly; and one of the ivory bars is cracked, and a brass
rail bent; but the rest of it’s sound enough. I expected to
finish it on Friday, but on Friday, when the putting together
was nearly done, I found that one of the nickel bars was
exactly one inch too short, and this I had to get remade; so
that the thing was not complete until this morning. It was at
ten o’clock today that the first of all Time Machines began
its career. I gave it a last tap, tried all the screws again, put
one more drop of oil on the quartz rod, and sat myself in the
saddle. I suppose a suicide who holds a pistol to his skull
feels much the same wonder at what will come next as I felt
then. I took the starting lever in one hand and the stopping
one in the other, pressed the first, and almost immediately
the second. I seemed to reel; I felt a nightmare sensation of
falling; and, looking round, I saw the laboratory exactly as
before. Had anything happened? For a moment I suspected
that my intellect had tricked me. Then I noted the clock. A
moment before, as it seemed, it had stood at a minute or so
past ten; now it was nearly half-past three!

<start>
“I am afraid I cannot convey the peculiar sensations of
time travelling. They are excessively unpleasant. There is a
feeling exactly like that one has upon a switchback—of a
helpless headlong motion! I felt the same horrible
anticipation, too, of an imminent smash. As I put on pace,
night followed day like the flapping of a black wing. The dim
suggestion of the laboratory seemed presently to fall away
from me, and I saw the sun hopping swiftly across the sky,
leaping it every minute, and every minute marking a day. I
supposed the laboratory had been destroyed and I had come
into the open air. I had a dim impression of scaffolding, but I
was already going too fast to be conscious of any moving
things. The slowest snail that ever crawled dashed by too
fast for me. The twinkling succession of darkness and light
was excessively painful to the eye. Then, in the intermittent
darknesses, I saw the moon spinning swiftly through her
quarters from new to full, and had a faint glimpse of the
circling stars. Presently, as I went on, still gaining velocity,
the palpitation of night and day merged into one continuous
greyness; the sky took on a wonderful deepness of blue, a
splendid luminous color like that of early twilight; the
jerking sun became a streak of fire, a brilliant arch, in space;
the moon a fainter fluctuating band; and I could see nothing
of the stars, save now and then a brighter circle flickering in
the blue

<start>
“The unpleasant sensations of the start were less poignant
now. They merged at last into a kind of hysterical
exhilaration. I remarked indeed a clumsy swaying of the
machine, for which I was unable to account. But my mind
was too confused to attend to it, so with a kind of madness
growing upon me, I flung myself into futurity. At first I scarce
thought of stopping, scarce thought of anything but these
new sensations. But presently a fresh series of impressions
grew up in my mind—a certain curiosity and therewith a
certain dread—until at last they took complete possession of
me. What strange developments of humanity, what
wonderful advances upon our rudimentary civilization, I
thought, might not appear when I came to look nearly into
the dim elusive world that raced and fluctuated before my
eyes! I saw great and splendid architecture rising about me,
more massive than any buildings of our own time, and yet,
as it seemed, built of glimmer and mist. I saw a richer green
flow up the hillside, and remain there, without any wintry
intermission. Even through the veil of my confusion the
earth seemed very fair. And so my mind came round to the
business of stopping.

<start>
“There was the sound of a clap of thunder in my ears. I
may have been stunned for a moment. A pitiless hail was
hissing round me, and I was sitting on soft turf in front of the
overset machine. Everything still seemed grey, but presently
I remarked that the confusion in my ears was gone. I looked
round me. I was on what seemed to be a little lawn in a
garden, surrounded by rhododendron bushes, and I noticed
that their mauve and purple blossoms were dropping in a
shower under the beating of the hailstones. The rebounding,
dancing hail hung in a cloud over the machine, and drove
along the ground like smoke. In a moment I was wet to the
skin. ‘Fine hospitality,’ said I, ‘to a man who has travelled
innumerable years to see you.’

<start>
“My sensations would be hard to describe. As the columns
of hail grew thinner, I saw the white figure more distinctly. It
was very large, for a silver birch-tree touched its shoulder. It
was of white marble, in shape something like a winged
sphinx, but the wings, instead of being carried vertically at
the sides, were spread so that it seemed to hover. The
pedestal, it appeared to me, was of bronze, and was thick
with verdigris. It chanced that the face was towards me; the
sightless eyes seemed to watch me; there was the faint
shadow of a smile on the lips. It was greatly weatherworn,
and that imparted an unpleasant suggestion of disease. I
stood looking at it for a little space—half a minute, perhaps,
or half an hour. It seemed to advance and to recede as the
hail drove before it denser or thinner. At last I tore my eyes
from it for a moment and saw that the hail curtain had worn
threadbare, and that the sky was lightening with the
promise of the sun.

<start>
“I looked up again at the crouching white shape, and the
full temerity of my voyage came suddenly upon me. What
might appear when that hazy curtain was altogether
withdrawn? What might not have happened to men? What if
cruelty had grown into a common passion? What if in this
interval the race had lost its manliness and had developed
into something inhuman, unsympathetic, and
overwhelmingly powerful? I might seem some old-world
savage animal, only the more dreadful and disgusting for
our common likeness—a foul creature to be incontinently
slain.

<start>
“For a moment I was staggered, though the import of his
gesture was plain enough. The question had come into my
mind abruptly: were these creatures fools? You may hardly
understand how it took me. You see I had always anticipated
that the people of the year Eight Hundred and Two Thousand
odd would be incredibly in front of us in knowledge, art,
everything. Then one of them suddenly asked me a question
that showed him to be on the intellectual level of one of our
five-year-old children—asked me, in fact, if I had come from
the sun in a thunderstorm! It let loose the judgment I had
suspended upon their clothes, their frail light limbs, and
fragile features. A flow of disappointment rushed across my
mind. For a moment I felt that I had built the Time Machine
in vain.


<start>
“The building had a huge entry, and was altogether of
colossal dimensions. I was naturally most occupied with the
growing crowd of little people, and with the big open portals
that yawned before me shadowy and mysterious. My general
impression of the world I saw over their heads was a tangled
waste of beautiful bushes and flowers, a long neglected and
yet weedless garden. I saw a number of tall spikes of strange
white flowers, measuring a foot perhaps across the spread of
the waxen petals. They grew scattered, as if wild, among the
variegated shrubs, but, as I say, I did not examine them
closely at this time. The Time Machine was left deserted on
the turf among the rhododendrons.

<start>
“The big doorway opened into a proportionately great hall
hung with brown. The roof was in shadow, and the windows,
partially glazed with coloured glass and partially unglazed,
admitted a tempered light. The floor was made up of huge
blocks of some very hard white metal, not plates nor slabs—
blocks, and it was so much worn, as I judged by the going to
and fro of past generations, as to be deeply channelled
along the more frequented ways. Transverse to the length
were innumerable tables made of slabs of polished stone,
raised perhaps a foot from the floor, and upon these were
heaps of fruits. Some I recognized as a kind of hypertrophied
raspberry and orange, but for the most part they were
strange.

<start>
“And perhaps the thing that struck me most was its
dilapidated look. The stained-glass windows, which
displayed only a geometrical pattern, were broken in many
places, and the curtains that hung across the lower end were
thick with dust. And it caught my eye that the corner of the
marble table near me was fractured. Nevertheless, the
general effect was extremely rich and picturesque. There
were, perhaps, a couple of hundred people dining in the hall,
and most of them, seated as near to me as they could come,
were watching me with interest, their little eyes shining over
the fruit they were eating. All were clad in the same soft and
yet strong, silky material.

<start>
“The calm of evening was upon the world as I emerged
from the great hall, and the scene was lit by the warm glow
of the setting sun. At first things were very confusing.
Everything was so entirely different from the world I had
known—even the flowers. The big building I had left was
situated on the slope of a broad river valley, but the Thames
had shifted perhaps a mile from its present position. I
resolved to mount to the summit of a crest, perhaps a mile
and a half away, from which I could get a wider view of this
our planet in the year Eight Hundred and Two Thousand
Seven Hundred and One AD. For that, I should explain, was
the date the little dials of my machine recorded

<start>
“And on the heels of that came another thought. I looked
at the half-dozen little figures that were following me. Then,
in a flash, I perceived that all had the same form of costume,
the same soft hairless visage, and the same girlish rotundity
of limb. It may seem strange, perhaps, that I had not noticed
this before. But everything was so strange. Now, I saw the
fact plainly enough. In costume, and in all the differences of
texture and bearing that now mark off the sexes from each
other, these people of the future were alike. And the children
seemed to my eyes to be but the miniatures of their parents.
I judged, then, that the children of that time were extremely
precocious, physically at least, and I found afterwards
abundant verification of my opinion.


<start>
“Seeing the ease and security in which these people were
living, I felt that this close resemblance of the sexes was
after all what one would expect; for the strength of a man
and the softness of a woman, the institution of the family,
and the differentiation of occupations are mere militant
necessities of an age of physical force; where population is
balanced and abundant, much childbearing becomes an evil
rather than a blessing to the State; where violence comes
but rarely and offspring are secure, there is less necessity—
indeed there is no necessity—for an efficient family, and the
specialization of the sexes with reference to their children’s
needs disappears. We see some beginnings of this even in
our own time, and in this future age it was complete. This, I
must remind you, was my speculation at the time. Later, I
was to appreciate how far it fell short of the reality.

<start>
“There I found a seat of some yellow metal that I did not
recognize, corroded in places with a kind of pinkish rust and
half smothered in soft moss, the armrests cast and filed into
the resemblance of griffins’ heads. I sat down on it, and I
surveyed the broad view of our old world under the sunset of
that long day. It was as sweet and fair a view as I have ever
seen. The sun had already gone below the horizon and the
west was flaming gold, touched with some horizontal bars of
purple and crimson. Below was the valley of the Thames, in
which the river lay like a band of burnished steel. I have
already spoken of the great palaces dotted about among the
variegated greenery, some in ruins and some still occupied.
Here and there rose a white or silvery figure in the waste
garden of the earth, here and there came the sharp vertical
line of some cupola or obelisk. There were no hedges, no
signs of proprietary rights, no evidences of agriculture; the
whole earth had become a garden.


<start>
“After all, the sanitation and the agriculture of today are
still in the rudimentary stage. The science of our time has
attacked but a little department of the field of human
disease, but even so, it spreads its operations very steadily
and persistently. Our agriculture and horticulture destroy a
weed just here and there and cultivate perhaps a score or so
of wholesome plants, leaving the greater number to fight out
a balance as they can. We improve our favourite plants and
animals — and how few they are — gradually by selective
breeding; now a new and better peach, now a seedless
grape, now a sweeter and larger flower, now a more
convenient breed of cattle. We improve them gradually,
because our ideals are vague and tentative, and our
knowledge is very limited; because Nature, too, is shy and
slow in our clumsy hands. Some day all this will be better
organized, and still better. That is the drift of the current in
spite of the eddies. The whole world will be intelligent,
educated, and cooperating; things will move faster and
faster towards the subjugation of Nature. In the end, wisely
and carefully we shall readjust the balance of animal and
vegetable life to suit our human needs

<start>
“Social triumphs, too, had been effected. I saw mankind
housed in splendid shelters, gloriously clothed, and as yet I
had found them engaged in no toil. There were no signs of
struggle, neither social nor economical struggle. The shop,
the advertisement, traffic, all that commerce which
constitutes the body of our world, was gone. It was natural
on that golden evening that I should jump at the idea of a
social paradise. The difficulty of increasing population had
been met, I guessed, and population had ceased to increase.
“But with this change in condition comes inevitably
adaptations to the change. What, unless biological science
is a mass of errors, is the cause of human intelligence and
vigour? Hardship and freedom: conditions under which the
active, strong, and subtle survive and the weaker go to the
wall; conditions that put a premium upon the loyal alliance
of capable men, upon self-restraint, patience, and decision.
And the institution of the family, and the emotions that arise
therein, the fierce jealousy, the tenderness for offspring,
parental self-devotion, all found their justification and
support in the imminent dangers of the young. Now, where
are these imminent dangers? There is a sentiment arising,
and it will grow, against connubial jealousy, against fierce
maternity, against passion of all sorts; unnecessary things
now, and things that make us uncomfortable, savage
survivals, discords in a refined and pleasant life.


<start>
“Under the new conditions of perfect comfort and security,
that restless energy, that with us is strength, would become
weakness. Even in our own time certain tendencies and
desires, once necessary to survival, are a constant source of
failure. Physical courage and the love of battle, for instance,
are no great help—may even be hindrances—to a civilized
man. And in a state of physical balance and security, power,
intellectual as well as physical, would be out of place. For
countless years I judged there had been no danger of war or
solitary violence, no danger from wild beasts, no wasting
disease to require strength of constitution, no need of toil.
For such a life, what we should call the weak are as well
equipped as the strong, are indeed no longer weak. Better
equipped indeed they are, for the strong would be fretted by
an energy for which there was no outlet. No doubt the
exquisite beauty of the buildings I saw was the outcome of
the last surgings of the now purposeless energy of mankind
before it settled down into perfect harmony with the
conditions under which it lived—the flourish of that triumph
which began the last great peace. This has ever been the
fate of energy in security; it takes to art and to eroticism,
and then come languor and decay.

<start>
“Even this artistic impetus would at last die away—had
almost died in the Time I saw. To adorn themselves with
flowers, to dance, to sing in the sunlight: so much was left of
the artistic spirit, and no more. Even that would fade in the
end into a contented inactivity. We are kept keen on the
grindstone of pain and necessity, and, it seemed to me, that
here was that hateful grindstone broken at last!
“As I stood there in the gathering dark I thought that in
this simple explanation I had mastered the problem of the
world — mastered the whole secret of these delicious people.
Possibly the checks they had devised for the increase of
population had succeeded too well, and their numbers had
rather diminished than kept stationary. That would account
for the abandoned ruins. Very simple was my explanation,
and plausible enough — as most wrong theories are!

<start>
As I stood there musing over this too perfect triumph of
man, the full moon, yellow and gibbous, came up out of an
overflow of silver light in the northeast. The bright little
figures ceased to move about below, a noiseless owl flitted
by, and I shivered with the chill of the night. I determined to
descend and find where I could sleep.
“I looked for the building I knew. Then my eye travelled
along to the figure of the White Sphinx upon the pedestal of
bronze, growing distinct as the light of the rising moon grew
brighter. I could see the silver birch against it. There was the
tangle of rhododendron bushes, black in the pale light, and
there was the little lawn. I looked at the lawn again. A queer
doubt chilled my complacency. ‘No,’ said I stoutly to myself,
‘that was not the lawn.’
“But it was the lawn. For the white leprous face of the
sphinx was towards it. Can you imagine what I felt as this
conviction came home to me? But you cannot. The Time
Machine was gone!


<start>
“At once, like a lash across the face, came the possibility of
losing my own age, of being left helpless in this strange new
world. The bare thought of it was an actual physical
sensation. I could feel it grip me at the throat and stop my
breathing. In another moment I was in a passion of fear and
running with great leaping strides down the slope. Once I
fell headlong and cut my face; I lost no time in stanching the
blood, but jumped up and ran on, with a warm trickle down
my cheek and chin. All the time I ran I was saying to myself:
‘They have moved it a little, pushed it under the bushes out
of the way.’ Nevertheless, I ran with all my might. All the
time, with the certainty that sometimes comes with
excessive dread, I knew that such assurance was folly, knew
instinctively that the machine was removed out of my reach.
My breath came with pain. I suppose I covered the whole
distance from the hill crest to the little lawn, two miles
perhaps, in ten minutes. And I am not a young man. I cursed
aloud, as I ran, at my confident folly in leaving the machine,
wasting good breath thereby. I cried aloud, and none
answered. Not a creature seemed to be stirring in that
moonlit world.


<start>
“When I reached the lawn my worst fears were realized.
Not a trace of the thing was to be seen. I felt faint and cold
when I faced the empty space among the black tangle of
bushes. I ran round it furiously, as if the thing might be
hidden in a corner, and then stopped abruptly, with my
hands clutching my hair. Above me towered the sphinx,
upon the bronze pedestal, white, shining, leprous, in the
light of the rising moon. It seemed to smile in mockery of my
dismay.
“I might have consoled myself by imagining the little
people had put the mechanism in some shelter for me, had I
not felt assured of their physical and intellectual
inadequacy. That is what dismayed me: the sense of some
hitherto unsuspected power, through whose intervention my
invention had vanished. Yet, for one thing I felt assured:
unless some other age had produced its exact duplicate, the
machine could not have moved in time. The attachment of
the levers—I will show you the method later—prevented
anyone from tampering with it in that way when they were
removed. It had moved, and was hid, only in space. But
then, where could it be?

<start>
“There I found a second great hall covered with cushions,
upon which, perhaps, a score or so of the little people were
sleeping. I have no doubt they found my second appearance
strange enough, coming suddenly out of the quiet darkness
with inarticulate noises and the splutter and flare of a
match. For they had forgotten about matches. ‘Where is my
Time Machine?’ I began, bawling like an angry child, laying
hands upon them and shaking them up together. It must
have been very queer to them. Some laughed, most of them
looked sorely frightened. When I saw them standing round
me, it came into my head that I was doing as foolish a thing
as it was possible for me to do under the circumstances, in
trying to revive the sensation of fear. For, reasoning from
their daylight behaviour, I thought that fear must be
forgotten.


<start>
“I sat up in the freshness of the morning, trying to
remember how I had got there, and why I had such a
profound sense of desertion and despair. Then things came
clear in my mind. With the plain, reasonable daylight, I
could look my circumstances fairly in the face. I saw the wild
folly of my frenzy overnight, and I could reason with myself.
‘Suppose the worst?’ I said. ‘Suppose the machine
altogether lost—perhaps destroyed? It behoves me to be
calm and patient, to learn the way of the people, to get a
clear idea of the method of my loss, and the means of
getting materials and tools; so that in the end, perhaps, I
may make another.’ That would be my only hope, perhaps,
but better than despair. And, after all, it was a beautiful and
curious world.


<start>
“I saw the heads of two orange-clad people coming
through the bushes and under some blossom-covered appletrees towards me. I turned smiling to them and beckoned
them to me. They came, and then, pointing to the bronze
pedestal, I tried to intimate my wish to open it. But at my
first gesture towards this they behaved very oddly. I don’t
know how to convey their expression to you. Suppose you
were to use a grossly improper gesture to a delicate-minded
woman—it is how she would look. They went off as if they
had received the last possible insult. I tried a sweet-looking
little chap in white next, with exactly the same result.
Somehow, his manner made me feel ashamed of myself. But,
as you know, I wanted the Time Machine, and I tried him
once more. As he turned off, like the others, my temper got
the better of me. In three strides I was after him, had him by
the loose part of his robe round the neck, and began
dragging him towards the sphinx. Then I saw the horror and
repugnance of his face, and all of a sudden I let him go.

<start>
“I got up after a time, and began walking aimlessly
through the bushes towards the hill again. ‘Patience,’ said I
to myself. ‘If you want your machine again you must leave
that sphinx alone. If they mean to take your machine away,
it’s little good your wrecking their bronze panels, and if they
don’t, you will get it back as soon as you can ask for it. To sit
among all those unknown things before a puzzle like that is
hopeless. That way lies monomania. Face this world. Learn
its ways, watch it, be careful of too hasty guesses at its
meaning. In the end you will find clues to it all.’ Then
suddenly the humour of the situation came into my mind:
the thought of the years I had spent in study and toil to get
into the future age, and now my passion of anxiety to get
out of it. I had made myself the most complicated and the
most hopeless trap that ever a man devised. Although it was
at my own expense, I could not help myself. I laughed aloud.

<start>
“So far as I could see, all the world displayed the same
exuberant richness as the Thames valley. From every hill I
climbed I saw the same abundance of splendid buildings,
endlessly varied in material and style, the same clustering
thickets of evergreens, the same blossom-laden trees and
tree-ferns. Here and there water shone like silver, and
beyond, the land rose into blue undulating hills, and so
faded into the serenity of the sky. A peculiar feature, which
presently attracted my attention, was the presence of
certain circular wells, several, as it seemed to me, of a very
great depth. One lay by the path up the hill, which I had
followed during my first walk. Like the others, it was rimmed
with bronze, curiously wrought, and protected by a little
cupola from the rain. Sitting by the side of these wells, and
peering down into the shafted darkness, I could see no
gleam of water, nor could I start any reflection with a lighted
match. But in all of them I heard a certain sound: a thud—
thud—thud, like the beating of some big engine; and I
discovered, from the flaring of my matches, that a steady
current of air set down the shafts. 

<start>
“And here I must admit that I learned very little of drains
and bells and modes of conveyance, and the like
conveniences, during my time in this real future. In some of
these visions of Utopias and coming times which I have read,
there is a vast amount of detail about building, and social
arrangements, and so forth. But while such details are easy
enough to obtain when the whole world is contained in one’s
imagination, they are altogether inaccessible to a real
traveller amid such realities as I found here. Conceive the
tale of London which a negro, fresh from Central Africa,
would take back to his tribe! What would he know of railway
companies, of social movements, of telephone and telegraph
wires, of the Parcels Delivery Company, and postal orders
and the like? Yet we, at least, should be willing enough to
explain these things to him! And even of what he knew, how
much could he make his untravelled friend either apprehend
or believe? Then, think how narrow the gap between a negro
and a white man of our own times, and how wide the
interval between myself and these of the Golden Age! I was
sensible of much which was unseen, and which contributed
to my comfort; but save for a general impression of
automatic organization, I fear I can convey very little of the
difference to your mind.

<start>
“I must confess that my satisfaction with my first theories
of an automatic civilization and a decadent humanity did
not long endure. Yet I could think of no other. Let me put my
difficulties. The several big palaces I had explored were mere
living places, great dining-halls and sleeping apartments. I
could find no machinery, no appliances of any kind. Yet
these people were clothed in pleasant fabrics that must at
times need renewal, and their sandals, though undecorated,
were fairly complex specimens of metalwork. Somehow such
things must be made. And the little people displayed no
vestige of a creative tendency. There were no shops, no
workshops, no sign of importations among them. They spent
all their time in playing gently, in bathing in the river, in
making love in a half-playful fashion, in eating fruit and
sleeping. I could not see how things were kept going

<start>
“This happened in the morning. In the afternoon I met my
little woman, as I believe it was, as I was returning towards
my centre from an exploration, and she received me with
cries of delight and presented me with a big garland of
flowers—evidently made for me and me alone. The thing
took my imagination. Very possibly I had been feeling
desolate. At any rate I did my best to display my
appreciation of the gift. We were soon seated together in a
little stone arbour, engaged in conversation, chiefly of
smiles. The creature’s friendliness affected me exactly as a
child’s might have done. We passed each other flowers, and
she kissed my hands. I did the same to hers. Then I tried
talk, and found that her name was Weena, which, though I
don’t know what it meant, somehow seemed appropriate
enough. That was the beginning of a queer friendship which
lasted a week, and ended—as I will tell you!

<start>
gure of white and gold so soon as I came over the hill.
“It was from her, too, that I learned that fear had not yet
left the world. She was fearless enough in the daylight, and
she had the oddest confidence in me; for once, in a foolish
moment, I made threatening grimaces at her, and she
simply laughed at them. But she dreaded the dark, dreaded
shadows, dreaded black things. Darkness to her was the one
thing dreadful. It was a singularly passionate emotion, and it
set me thinking and observing. I discovered then, among
other things, that these little people gathered into the great
houses after dark, and slept in droves. To enter upon them
without a light was to put them into a tumult of
apprehension. I never found one out of doors, or one
sleeping alone within doors, after dark. Yet I was still such a
blockhead that I missed the lesson of that fear, and in spite
of Weena’s distress I insisted upon sleeping away from these
slumbering multitudes

<start>
“The moon was setting, and the dying moonlight and the
first pallor of dawn were mingled in a ghastly half-light. The
bushes were inky black, the ground a sombre grey, the sky
colourless and cheerless. And up the hill I thought I could
see ghosts. There several times, as I scanned the slope, I saw
white figures. Twice I fancied I saw a solitary white, apelike
creature running rather quickly up the hill, and once near
the ruins I saw a leash of them carrying some dark body.
They moved hastily. I did not see what became of them. It
seemed that they vanished among the bushes. The dawn
was still indistinct, you must understand. I was feeling that
chill, uncertain, early-morning feeling you may have known.
I doubted my eyes.

<start>
“Well, one very hot morning—my fourth, I think—as I was
seeking shelter from the heat and glare in a colossal ruin
near the great house where I slept and fed, there happened
this strange thing: Clambering among these heaps of
masonry, I found a narrow gallery, whose end and side
windows were blocked by fallen masses of stone. By contrast
with the brilliancy outside, it seemed at first impenetrably
dark to me. I entered it groping, for the change from light to
blackness made spots of colour swim before me. Suddenly I
halted spellbound. A pair of eyes, luminous by reflection
against the daylight without, was watching me out of the
darkness.


<start>
“My impression of it is, of course, imperfect; but I know it
was a dull white, and had strange large greyish-red eyes;
also that there was flaxen hair on its head and down its
back. But, as I say, it went too fast for me to see distinctly. I
cannot even say whether it ran on all-fours, or only with its
forearms held very low. After an instant’s pause I followed it
into the second heap of ruins. I could not find it at first; but,
after a time in the profound obscurity, I came upon one of
those round well-like openings of which I have told you, half
closed by a fallen pillar. A sudden thought came to me.
Could this Thing have vanished down the shaft? I lit a
match, and, looking down, I saw a small, white, moving
creature, with large bright eyes which regarded me
steadfastly as it retreated. It made me shudder. It was so like
a human spider! It was clambering down the wall, and now I
saw for the first time a number of metal foot and hand rests
forming a kind of ladder down the shaft. Then the light
burned my fingers and fell out of my hand, going out as it
dropped, and when I had lit another the little monster had
disappeared.

<start>
“They seemed distressed to find me, my arm against the
overturned pillar, peering down the well. Apparently it was
considered bad form to remark these apertures; for when I
pointed to this one, and tried to frame a question about it in
their tongue, they were still more visibly distressed and
turned away. But they were interested by my matches, and I
struck some to amuse them. I tried them again about the
well, and again I failed. So presently I left them, meaning to
go back to Weena, and see what I could get from her. But my
mind was already in revolution; my guesses and impressions
were slipping and sliding to a new adjustment. I had now a
clue to the import of these wells, to the ventilating towers,
to the mystery of the ghosts; to say nothing of a hint at the
meaning of the bronze gates and the fate of the Time
Machine! And very vaguely there came a suggestion
towards the solution of the economic problem that had
puzzled me.


<start>
“Beneath my feet, then, the earth must be tunnelled
enormously, and these tunnellings were the habitat of the
new race. The presence of ventilating shafts and wells along
the hill slopes—everywhere, in fact, except along the river
valley—showed how universal were its ramifications. What
so natural, then, as to assume that it was in this artificial
Under-world that such work as was necessary to the comfort
of the daylight race was done? The notion was so plausible
that I at once accepted it, and went on to assume the how of
this splitting of the human species. I dare say you will
anticipate the shape of my theory; though, for myself, I very
soon felt that it fell far short of the truth.

<start>
“At first, proceeding from the problems of our own age, it
seemed clear as daylight to me that the gradual widening of
the present merely temporary and social difference between
the Capitalist and the Labourer, was the key to the whole
position. No doubt it will seem grotesque enough to you—
and wildly incredible!—and yet even now there are existing
circumstances to point that way. There is a tendency to
utilize underground space for the less ornamental purposes
of civilization; there is the Metropolitan Railway in London,
for instance, there are new electric railways, there are
subways, there are underground workrooms and restaurants,
and they increase and multiply. Evidently, I thought, this
tendency had increased till Industry had gradually lost its
birthright in the sky.

<start>
“Again, the exclusive tendency of richer people—due, no
doubt, to the increasing refinement of their education, and
the widening gulf between them and the rude violence of
the poor—is already leading to the closing, in their interest,
of considerable portions of the surface of the land. About
London, for instance, perhaps half the prettier country is
shut in against intrusion. And this same widening gulf—
which is due to the length and expense of the higher
educational process and the increased facilities for and
temptations towards refined habits on the part of the rich—
will make that exchange between class and class, that
promotion by intermarriage which at present retards the
splitting of our species along lines of social stratification,
less and less frequent. So, in the end, above ground you
must have the Haves, pursuing pleasure and comfort and
beauty, and below ground the Have-nots, the Workers
getting continually adapted to the conditions of their labour.

<start>
Once they were there, they would no doubt have to pay rent,
and not a little of it, for the ventilation of their caverns; and
if they refused, they would starve or be suffocated for
arrears. Such of them as were so constituted as to be
miserable and rebellious would die; and, in the end, the
balance being permanent, the survivors would become as
well adapted to the conditions of underground life, and as
happy in their way, as the Upper-world people were to theirs.
As it seemed to me, the refined beauty and the etiolated
pallor followed naturally enough.

<start>
This, I must warn you, was my theory at the time. I had no
convenient cicerone in the pattern of the Utopian books. My
explanation may be absolutely wrong. I still think it is the
most plausible one. But even on this supposition the
balanced civilization that was at last attained must have
long since passed its zenith, and was now far fallen into
decay. The too-perfect security of the Upper-worlders had
led them to a slow movement of degeneration, to a general
dwindling in size, strength, and intelligence. That I could see
clearly enough already. What had happened to the Undergrounders I did not yet suspect ; but from what I had seen of
the Morlocks—that, by the by, was the name by which these
creatures were called — I could imagine that the modification
of the human type was even far more profound than among
the ‘Eloi,’ the beautiful race that I already knew

<start>
“Then came troublesome doubts. Why had the Morlocks
taken my Time Machine? For I felt sure it was they who had
taken it. Why, too, if the Eloi were masters, could they not
restore the machine to me? And why were they so terribly
afraid of the dark? I proceeded, as I have said, to question
Weena about this Under-world, but here again I was
disappointed. At first she would not understand my
questions, and presently she refused to answer them. She
shivered as though the topic was unendurable. And when I
pressed her, perhaps a little harshly, she burst into tears.
They were the only tears, except my own, I ever saw in that
Golden Age. When I saw them I ceased abruptly to trouble
about the Morlocks, and was only concerned in banishing
these signs of the human inheritance from Weena’s eyes.
And very soon she was smiling and clapping her hands,
while I solemnly burned a match.

<start>
“The next night I did not sleep well. Probably my health
was a little disordered. I was oppressed with perplexity and
doubt. Once or twice I had a feeling of intense fear for which
I could perceive no definite reason. I remember creeping
noiselessly into the great hall where the little people were
sleeping in the moonlight—that night Weena was among
them—and feeling reassured by their presence. It occurred
to me even then, that in the course of a few days the moon
must pass through its last quarter, and the nights grow dark,
when the appearances of these unpleasant creatures from
below, these whitened Lemurs, this new vermin that had
replaced the old, might be more abundant. And on both
these days I had the restless feeling of one who shirks an
inevitable duty. I felt assured that the Time Machine was
only to be recovered by boldly penetrating these
underground mysteries.

<start>
“It was this restlessness, this insecurity, perhaps, that
drove me further and further afield in my exploring
expeditions. Going to the southwestward towards the rising
country that is now called Combe Wood, I observed far off, in
the direction of nineteenth-century Banstead, a vast green
structure, different in character from any I had hitherto seen.
It was larger than the largest of the palaces or ruins I knew,
and the façade had an Oriental look: the face of it having
the lustre, as well as the pale-green tint, a kind of bluishgreen, of a certain type of Chinese porcelain. This difference
in aspect suggested a difference in use, and I was minded to
push on and explore. But the day was growing late, and I
had come upon the sight of the place after a long and tiring
circuit; so I resolved to hold over the adventure for the
following day, and I returned to the welcome and the
caresses of little Weena. But next morning I perceived
clearly enough that my curiosity regarding the Palace of
Green Porcelain was a piece of self-deception, to enable me

<start>
I resolved I would make the descent without further waste of time, and
started out in the early morning towards a well near the
ruins of granite and aluminium.
“Little Weena ran with me. She danced beside me to the
well, but when she saw me lean over the mouth and look
downward, she seemed strangely disconcerted. ‘Goodbye,
little Weena,’ I said, kissing her; and then putting her down,
I began to feel over the parapet for the climbing hooks.
Rather hastily, I may as well confess, for I feared my courage
might leak away! At first she watched me in amazement.
Then she gave a most piteous cry, and running to me, she
began to pull at me with her little hands. I think her
opposition nerved me rather to proceed. I shook her off,
perhaps a little roughly, and in another moment I was in the
throat of the well. I saw her agonized face over the parapet,
and smiled to reassure her. Then I had to look down at the
unstable hooks to which I clung.


<start>
“I had to clamber down a shaft of perhaps two hundred
yards. The descent was effected by means of metallic bars
projecting from the sides of the well, and these being
adapted to the needs of a creature much smaller and lighter
than myself, I was speedily cramped and fatigued by the
descent. And not simply fatigued! One of the bars bent
suddenly under my weight, and almost swung me off into
the blackness beneath. For a moment I hung by one hand,
and after that experience I did not dare to rest again.
Though my arms and back were presently acutely painful, I
went on clambering down the sheer descent with as quick a
motion as possible. Glancing upward, I saw the aperture, a
small blue disk, in which a star was visible, while little
Weena’s head showed as a round black projection. The
thudding sound of a machine below grew louder and more
oppressive. Everything save that little disk above was
profoundly dark, and when I looked up again Weena had
disappeared.


<start>
“I was in an agony of discomfort. I had some thought of
trying to go up the shaft again, and leave the Under-world
alone. But even while I turned this over in my mind I
continued to descend. At last, with intense relief, I saw dimly
coming up, a foot to the right of me, a slender loophole in
the wall. Swinging myself in, I found it was the aperture of a
narrow horizontal tunnel in which I could lie down and rest.
It was not too soon. My arms ached, my back was cramped,
and I was trembling with the prolonged terror of a fall.
Besides this, the unbroken darkness had had a distressing
effect upon my eyes. The air was full of the throb and hum of
machinery pumping air down the shaft.


<start>
“I do not know how long I lay. I was roused by a soft hand
touching my face. Starting up in the darkness I snatched at
my matches and, hastily striking one, I saw three stooping
white creatures similar to the one I had seen above ground
in the ruin, hastily retreating before the light. Living, as they
did, in what appeared to me impenetrable darkness, their
eyes were abnormally large and sensitive, just as are the
pupils of the abysmal fishes, and they reflected the light in
the same way. I have no doubt they could see me in that
rayless obscurity, and they did not seem to have any fear of
me apart from the light. But, so soon as I struck a match in
order to see them, they fled incontinently, vanishing into
dark gutters and tunnels, from which their eyes glared at me
in the strangest fashion.

<start>
“I tried to call to them, but the language they had was
apparently different from that of the Over-world people; so
that I was needs left to my own unaided efforts, and the
thought of flight before exploration was even then in my
mind. But I said to myself, ‘You are in for it now,’ and, feeling
my way along the tunnel, I found the noise of machinery
grow louder. Presently the walls fell away from me, and I
came to a large open space, and striking another match, saw
that I had entered a vast arched cavern, which stretched
into utter darkness beyond the range of my light. The view I
had of it was as much as one could see in the burning of a
match.

<start>
“Necessarily my memory is vague. Great shapes like big
machines rose out of the dimness, and cast grotesque black
shadows, in which dim spectral Morlocks sheltered from the
glare. The place, by the by, was very stuffy and oppressive,
and the faint halitus of freshly shed blood was in the air.
Some way down the central vista was a little table of white
metal, laid with what seemed a meal. The Morlocks at any
rate were carnivorous! Even at the time, I remember
wondering what large animal could have survived to furnish
the red joint I saw. It was all very indistinct: the heavy smell,
the big unmeaning shapes, the obscene figures lurking in
the shadows, and only waiting for the darkness to come at
me again! Then the match burned down, and stung my
fingers, and fell, a wriggling red spot in the blackness.


<start>
“I was afraid to push my way in among all this machinery
in the dark, and it was only with my last glimpse of light I
discovered that my store of matches had run low. It had
never occurred to me until that moment that there was any
need to economize them, and I had wasted almost half the
box in astonishing the Upper-worlders, to whom fire was a
novelty. Now, as I say, I had four left, and while I stood in the
dark, a hand touched mine, lank fingers came feeling over
my face, and I was sensible of a peculiar unpleasant odour. I
fancied I heard the breathing of a crowd of those dreadful
little beings about me. I felt the box of matches in my hand
being gently disengaged, and other hands behind me
plucking at my clothing. The sense of these unseen
creatures examining me was indescribably unpleasant. The
sudden realization of my ignorance of their ways of thinking
and doing came home to me very vividly in the darkness. I
shouted at them as loudly as I could. They started away, and
then I could feel them approaching me again.

<start>
They clutched
at me more boldly, whispering odd sounds to each other. I
shivered violently, and shouted again — rather discordantly.
This time they were not so seriously alarmed, and they made
a queer laughing noise as they came back at me. I will
confess I was horribly frightened. I determined to strike
another match and escape under the protection of its glare. I
did so, and eking out the flicker with a scrap of paper from
my pocket, I made good my retreat to the narrow tunnel. But
I had scarce entered this when my light was blown out and
in the blackness I could hear the Morlocks rustling like wind
among leaves, and pattering like the rain, as they hurried
after me.


<start>
“In a moment I was clutched by several hands, and there
was no mistaking that they were trying to haul me back. I
struck another light, and waved it in their dazzled faces. You
can scarce imagine how nauseatingly inhuman they
looked—those pale, chinless faces and great, lidless,
pinkish-grey eyes!—as they stared in their blindness and
bewilderment. But I did not stay to look, I promise you: I
retreated again, and when my second match had ended, I
struck my third. It had almost burned through when I
reached the opening into the shaft. I lay down on the edge,
for the throb of the great pump below made me giddy. Then I
felt sideways for the projecting hooks, and, as I did so, my
feet were grasped from behind, and I was violently tugged
backward. I lit my last match… and it incontinently went
out. But I had my hand on the climbing bars now, and,
kicking violently, I disengaged myself from the clutches of
the Morlocks and was speedily clambering up the shaft,
while they stayed peering and blinking up at me: all but one
little wretch who followed me for some way, and well-nigh
secured my boot as a trophy

<start>
“That climb seemed interminable to me. With the last
twenty or thirty feet of it a deadly nausea came upon me. I
had the greatest difficulty in keeping my hold. The last few
yards was a frightful struggle against this faintness. Several
times my head swam, and I felt all the sensations of falling.
At last, however, I got over the well-mouth somehow, and
staggered out of the ruin into the blinding sunlight. I fell
upon my face. Even the soil smelt sweet and clean. Then I
remember Weena kissing my hands and ears, and the voices
of others among the Eloi. Then, for a time, I was insensible.

<start>
“The enemy I dreaded may surprise you. It was the
darkness of the new moon. Weena had put this into my head
by some at first incomprehensible remarks about the Dark
Nights. It was not now such a very difficult problem to guess
what the coming Dark Nights might mean. The moon was on
the wane: each night there was a longer interval of
darkness. And I now understood to some slight degree at
least the reason of the fear of the little Upper-world people
for the dark. I wondered vaguely what foul villainy it might
be that the Morlocks did under the new moon. I felt pretty
sure now that my second hypothesis was all wrong. The
Upper-world people might once have been the favoured
aristocracy, and the Morlocks their mechanical servants: but
that had long since passed away.

<start>
 The two species that had
resulted from the evolution of man were sliding down
towards, or had already arrived at, an altogether new
relationship. The Eloi, like the Carolingian kings, had
decayed to a mere beautiful futility. They still possessed the
earth on sufferance: since the Morlocks, subterranean for
innumerable generations, had come at last to find the daylit
surface intolerable. And the Morlocks made their garments, I
inferred, and maintained them in their habitual needs,
perhaps through the survival of an old habit of service. They
did it as a standing horse paws with his foot, or as a man
enjoys killing animals in sport: because ancient and
departed necessities had impressed it on the organism. But,
clearly, the old order was already in part reversed. The
Nemesis of the delicate ones was creeping on apace. Ages
ago, thousands of generations ago, man had thrust his
brother man out of the ease and the sunshine.

<start>
And now that
brother was coming back changed! Already the Eloi had
begun to learn one old lesson anew. They were becoming
reacquainted with Fear. And suddenly there came into my
head the memory of the meat I had seen in the Under-world.
It seemed odd how it floated into my mind: not stirred up as
it were by the current of my meditations, but coming in
almost like a question from outside. I tried to recall the form
of it. I had a vague sense of something familiar, but I could
not tell what it was at the time.


<start>
“I wandered during the afternoon along the valley of the
Thames, but found nothing that commended itself to my
mind as inaccessible. All the buildings and trees seemed
easily practicable to such dexterous climbers as the
Morlocks, to judge by their wells, must be. Then the tall
pinnacles of the Palace of Green Porcelain and the polished
gleam of its walls came back to my memory; and in the
evening, taking Weena like a child upon my shoulder, I went
up the hills towards the southwest. The distance, I had
reckoned, was seven or eight miles, but it must have been
nearer eighteen. I had first seen the place on a moist
afternoon when distances are deceptively diminished. In
addition, the heel of one of my shoes was loose, and a nail
was working through the sole—they were comfortable old
shoes I wore about indoors—so that I was lame. And it was
already long past sunset when I came in sight of the palace,
silhouetted black against the pale yellow of the sky.


<start>
“Weena had been hugely delighted when I began to carry
her, but after a while she desired me to let her down, and
ran along by the side of me, occasionally darting off on
either hand to pick flowers to stick in my pockets. My
pockets had always puzzled Weena, but at the last she had
concluded that they were an eccentric kind of vase for floral
decoration. At least she utilized them for that purpose. And
that reminds me! In changing my jacket I found…”
The Time Traveller paused, put his hand into his pocket,
and silently placed two withered flowers, not unlike very
large white mallows, upon the little table. Then he resumed
his narrative.


<start>
As the hush of evening crept over the world and we
proceeded over the hill crest towards Wimbledon, Weena
grew tired and wanted to return to the house of grey stone.
But I pointed out the distant pinnacles of the Palace of
Green Porcelain to her, and contrived to make her
understand that we were seeking a refuge there from her
Fear. You know that great pause that comes upon things
before the dusk? Even the breeze stops in the trees. To me
there is always an air of expectation about that evening
stillness. The sky was clear, remote, and empty save for a
few horizontal bars far down in the sunset. Well, that night
the expectation took the colour of my fears. In that darkling
calm my senses seemed preternaturally sharpened. I fancied
I could even feel the hollowness of the ground beneath my
feet: could, indeed, almost see through it the Morlocks on
their anthill going hither and thither and waiting for the
dark. In my excitement I fancied that they would receive my
invasion of their burrows as a declaration of war. And why
had they taken my Time Machine?

<start>
“So we went on in the quiet, and the twilight deepened
into night. The clear blue of the distance faded, and one star
after another came out. The ground grew dim and the trees
black. Weena’s fears and her fatigue grew upon her. I took
her in my arms and talked to her and caressed her. Then, as
the darkness grew deeper, she put her arms round my neck,
and, closing her eyes, tightly pressed her face against my
shoulder. So we went down a long slope into a valley, and
there in the dimness I almost walked into a little river. This I
waded, and went up the opposite side of the valley, past a
number of sleeping houses, and by a statue—a Faun, or
some such figure, minus the head. Here too were acacias. So
far I had seen nothing of the Morlocks, but it was yet early in
the night, and the darker hours before the old moon rose
were still to come.

<start>
“Weena, I was glad to find, was fast asleep. I carefully
wrapped her in my jacket, and sat down beside her to wait
for the moonrise. The hillside was quiet and deserted, but
from the black of the wood there came now and then a stir of
living things. Above me shone the stars, for the night was
very clear. I felt a certain sense of friendly comfort in their
twinkling. All the old constellations had gone from the sky,
however: that slow movement which is imperceptible in a
hundred human lifetimes, had long since rearranged them in
unfamiliar groupings. But the Milky Way, it seemed to me,
was still the same tattered streamer of stardust as of yore.
Southward (as I judged it) was a very bright red star that
was new to me; it was even more splendid than our own
green Sirius. And amid all these scintillating points of light
one bright planet shone kindly and steadily like the face of
an old friend.

##############################################################################################

<start>
“ Countess Andrenyi? No. ” She shook her head. “It may seem extraordinary
to you – but I did not recognise her. She was not grown up, you see, when I
knew her. That was over three years ago. It is true that the Countess reminded
me of someone ; it puzzled me. But she looks so foreign – I never connected her
with the little American schoolgirl. I only glanced at her casually when coming
into the restaurant car, and I noticed her clothes more than her face.” She smiled
faintly. “ Women do! And then – well – I had my own preoccupations. ”

<start>
“ What is that you are saying? Why, that little one – she was the delight of the
house. Tonio, she called me. And she would sit in the car and pretend to hold the
wheel. All the household worshipped her! Even the police came to understand
that. Ah, the beautiful little one! ”

<start>
“ I hope I am not intruding, sir. I thought it best to come along at once, sir, and
tell you the truth. I was Colonel Armstrong’s batman in the War, sir, and
afterwards I was his valet in New York. I am afraid I concealed that fact this
morning. It was very wrong of me, sir, and I thought I’d better come and make a
clean breast of it. But I hope, sir, that you’re not suspecting Tonio in any way.
Old Tonio, sir, wouldn’t hurt a fly. And I can swear positively that he never left
the carriage all last night. So, you see, sir, he couldn’t have done it. Tonio may
be a foreigner, sir, but he’s a very gentle creature. Not like those nasty murdering
Italians one reads about. ”

<start>
Now you all know the facts of the case. Mr. Ratchett was found stabbed this
morning. He was last known to be alive at 12.37 last night when he spoke to the
Wagon Lit conductor through the door. A watch in his pyjama pocket was found
to be badly dented, and it had stopped at a quarter past one. Dr. Constantine, who
examined the body when found, puts the time of death as having been between
midnight and two in the morning. At half an hour after midnight, as you all
know, the train ran into a snowdrift. After that time it was impossible for anyone
to leave the train.

<start>
“ Now I put it to you, ladies and gentlemen, that Mr. Ratchett knew a good
deal more than he told. The enemy, as Mr. Ratchett expected, joined the train at
Belgrade or else at Vincovci by the door left open by Colonel Arbuthnot and Mr.
MacQueen, who had just descended to the platform. He was provided with a suit
of Wagon Lit uniform, which he wore over his ordinary clothes, and a pass-key
which enabled him to gain access to Mr. Ratchett’s compartment in spite of the
door’s being locked. Mr. Ratchett was under the influence of a sleeping draught.
This man stabbed him with great ferocity and left the compartment through the
communicating door leading to Mrs. Hubbard’s compartment ”

<start>
Now we come to the evidence of Mr. Hardman. I believed all that he told
me about his own identity, but when it came to the actual methods he had
employed to guard Mr. Ratchett, his story was neither more nor less than absurd.
The only way to have protected Ratchett effectively was to pass the night
actually in his compartment or in some spot where he could watch the door. The
one thing that his evidence did show plainly was that no one in any other part of
the train could possibly have murdered Ratchett. It drew a clear circle round the
Stamboul-Calais carriage. That seemed to me a rather curious and inexplicable
fact, and I put it aside to think over.

<start>
You probably all know by now of the few words I overheard between Miss
Debenham and Colonel Arbuthnot. The interesting thing to my mind was the
fact that Colonel Arbuthnot called her Mary and was clearly on terms of
intimacy with her. But the Colonel was supposed to have met her only a few
days previously. And I know Englishmen of the Colonel’s type – even if he had
fallen in love with the young lady at first sight, he would have advanced slowly
and with decorum, not rushing things. Therefore I concluded that Colonel
Arbuthnot and Miss Debenham were in reality well acquainted and were for
some reason pretending to be strangers. Another small point was Miss
Debenham’s easy familiarity with the term ‘long distance’ for a telephone call.
Yet Miss Debenham had told me that she had never been in the States

<start>
And here let me say just a word or two about times. To my mind the really
interesting point about the dented watch, is the place where it was found – in
Ratchett’s pyjama pocket, a singularly uncomfortable and unlikely place to keep
one’s watch, especially as there is a watch ‘hook’ provided just by the head of
the bed. I felt sure, therefore, that the watch had been deliberately placed in the
pocket – faked. The crime, then, was not committed at a quarter past one

<start>
I saw it as a perfect mosaic, each person playing his or her allotted part. It
was so arranged that, if suspicion should fall on any one person, the evidence of
one or more of the others would clear the accused person and confuse the issue.
Hardman’s evidence was necessary in case some outsider should be suspected of
the crime and be unable to prove an alibi. The passengers in the Stamboul
carriage were in no danger. Every minute detail of their evidence was worked
out beforehand. The whole thing was a very cleverly planned jigsaw puzzle, so
arranged that every fresh piece of knowledge that came to light made the
solution of the whole more difficult. As my friend M. Bouc remarked, the case
seemed fantastically impossible! That was exactly the impression intended to be
conveyed.

<start>
We decided then and there (perhaps we were mad – I don’t know) that the
sentence of death that Cassetti had escaped had got to be carried out. There were
twelve of us – or rather eleven ; Susanne’s father was over in France, of course.
First we thought we’d draw lots as to who should do it, but in the end we
decided on this way. It was the chauffeur, Antonio, who suggested it. Mary
worked out all the details later with Hector MacQueen. He’d always adored
Sonia – my daughter – and it was he who explained to us exactly how Cassetti’s
money had managed to get him off.

<start>
“ Well, ” she said, “ you know everything now, M. Poirot. What are you going
to do about it? If it must all come out, can’t you lay the blame upon me and me
only? I would have stabbed that man twelve times willingly. It wasn’t only that
he was responsible for my daughter’s death and her child’s and that of the other
child who might have been alive and happy now. It was more than that: there had
been other children kidnapped before Daisy, and there might be others in the
future. Society had condemned him – we were only carrying out the sentence.

<start>
Langdon had little doubt. His books on religious paintings and cult symbology had made him a
reluctant celebrity in the art world, and last year Langdon's visibility had increased a hundredfold
after his involvement in a widely publicized incident at the Vatican. Since then, the stream of 
selfimportant historians and art buffs arriving at his door had seemed never-ending.

<start>
Langdon was feeling anything but fortunate, and coincidence was a concept he did not entirely
trust. As someone who had spent his life exploring the hidden interconnectivity of disparate
emblems and ideologies, Langdon viewed the world as a web of profoundly intertwined histories
and events. The connections may be invisible, he often preached to his symbology classes at
Harvard, but they are always there, buried just beneath the surface.

<start>
The new entrance to the Paris Louvre had become almost as famous as the museum itself. The
controversial, neomodern glass pyramid designed by Chinese-born American architect I. M. Pei
still evoked scorn from traditionalists who felt it destroyed the dignity of the Renaissance
courtyard. Goethe had described architecture as frozen music, and Pei's critics described this
pyramid as fingernails on a chalkboard. Progressive admirers, though, hailed Pei's seventy-one-foottall transparent pyramid as a dazzling synergy of ancient structure and modern method—a
symbolic link between the old and new—helping usher the Louvre into the next millennium.

<start>
As they dropped farther into the subterranean foyer, the yawning space slowly emerged from the
shadows. Built fifty-seven feet beneath ground level, the Louvre's newly constructed 70,000-squarefoot lobby spread out like an endless grotto. Constructed in warm ocher marble to be compatible
with the honey-colored stone of the Louvre facade above, the subterranean hall was usually vibrant
with sunlight and tourists. Tonight, however, the lobby was barren and dark, giving the entire space
a cold and crypt-like atmosphere.

<start>
Two months ago, an Opus Dei group at a midwestern university had been caught drugging new
recruits with mescaline in an effort to induce a euphoric state that neophytes would perceive as a
religious experience. Another university student had used his barbed cilice belt more often than the
recommended two hours a day and had given himself a near lethal infection. In Boston not long
ago, a disillusioned young investment banker had signed over his entire life savings to Opus Dei
before attempting suicide.

<start>
Of course the ultimate embarrassment had been the widely publicized trial of FBI spy Robert
Hanssen, who, in addition to being a prominent member of Opus Dei, had turned out to be a sexual
deviant, his trial uncovering evidence that he had rigged hidden video cameras in his own bedroom
so his friends could watch him having sex with his wife. "Hardly the pastime of a devout Catholic,"
the judge had noted.

<start>
The muted crimson lighting unfortunately conjured memories of Langdon's last experience in
noninvasive lighting in the Vatican Secret Archives. This was tonight's second unsettling parallel
with his near-death in Rome. He flashed on Vittoria again. She had been absent from his dreams
for months. Langdon could not believe Rome had been only a year ago; it felt like decades.
Another life. His last correspondence from Vittoria had been in December — a postcard saying she
was headed to the Java Sea to continue her research in entanglement physics. something about
using satellites to track manta ray migrations. Langdon had never harbored delusions that a woman
like Vittoria Vetra could have been happy living with him on a college campus, but their encounter
in Rome had unlocked in him a longing he never imagined he could feel. His lifelong affinity for
bachelorhood and the simple freedoms it allowed had been shaken somehow. replaced by an
unexpected emptiness that seemed to have grown over the past year.

<start>
When the ghost awoke in the morning, his world felt clearer. He gazed up at the crucifix on the
wall above his bed. Although it no longer spoke to him, he felt a comforting aura in its presence.
Sitting up, he was surprised to find a newspaper clipping on his bedside table. The article was in
French, a week old. When he read the story, he filled with fear. It told of an earthquake in the
mountains that had destroyed a prison and freed many dangerous criminals.

<start>
Langdon stood beside the sinks, staring in bewilderment at DCPJ cryptographer Sophie Neveu.
Only minutes ago, Langdon had listened to her phone message, thinking the newly arrived
cryptographer must be insane. And yet, the more he listened, the more he sensed Sophie Neveu
was speaking in earnest. Do not react to this message. Just listen calmly. You are in danger right
now. Follow my directions very closely. Filled with uncertainty, Langdon had decided to do exactly
as Sophie advised. He told Fache that the phone message was regarding an injured friend back
home. Then he had asked to use the rest room at the end of the Grand Gallery.
###################################################################################
<start>
“Weena, I was glad to find, was fast asleep. I carefully
wrapped her in my jacket, and sat down beside her to wait
for the moonrise. The hillside was quiet and deserted, but
from the black of the wood there came now and then a stir of
living things. Above me shone the stars, for the night was
very clear. I felt a certain sense of friendly comfort in their
twinkling. All the old constellations had gone from the sky,
however: that slow movement which is imperceptible in a
hundred human lifetimes, had long since rearranged them in
unfamiliar groupings. But the Milky Way, it seemed to me,
was still the same tattered streamer of stardust as of yore.
Southward (as I judged it) was a very bright red star that
was new to me; it was even more splendid than our own
green Sirius. And amid all these scintillating points of light
one bright planet shone kindly and steadily like the face of
an old friend.

<start>
“Looking at these stars suddenly dwarfed my own troubles
and all the gravities of terrestrial life. I thought of their
unfathomable distance, and the slow inevitable drift of their
movements out of the unknown past into the unknown
future. I thought of the great precessional cycle that the pole
of the earth describes. Only forty times had that silent
revolution occurred during all the years that I had traversed.
And during these few revolutions all the activity, all the
traditions, the complex organizations, the nations,
languages, literatures, aspirations, even the mere memory of
Man as I knew him, had been swept out of existence. Instead
were these frail creatures who had forgotten their high
ancestry, and the white Things of which I went in terror.
Then I thought of the Great Fear that was between the two
species, and for the first time, with a sudden shiver, came
the clear knowledge of what the meat I had seen might be.
Yet it was too horrible! I looked at little Weena sleeping
beside me, her face white and starlike under the stars, and
forthwith dismissed the thought.


<start>
“Through that long night I held my mind off the Morlocks
as well as I could, and whiled away the time by trying to
fancy I could find signs of the old constellations in the new
confusion. The sky kept very clear, except for a hazy cloud
or so. No doubt I dozed at times. Then, as my vigil wore on,
came a faintness in the eastward sky, like the reflection of
some colourless fire, and the old moon rose, thin and peaked
and white. And close behind, and overtaking it, and
overflowing it, the dawn came, pale at first, and then
growing pink and warm. No Morlocks had approached us.
Indeed, I had seen none upon the hill that night. And in the
confidence of renewed day it almost seemed to me that my
fear had been unreasonable. I stood up and found my foot
with the loose heel swollen at the ankle and painful under
the heel; so I sat down again, took off my shoes, and flung
them away.

<start>
“I awakened Weena, and we went down into the wood,
now green and pleasant instead of black and forbidding. We
found some fruit wherewith to break our fast. We soon met
others of the dainty ones, laughing and dancing in the
sunlight as though there was no such thing in nature as the
night. And then I thought once more of the meat that I had
seen. I felt assured now of what it was, and from the bottom
of my heart I pitied this last feeble rill from the great flood of
humanity. Clearly, at some time in the Long-Ago of human
decay the Morlocks’ food had run short. Possibly they had
lived on rats and suchlike vermin. Even now man is far less
discriminating and exclusive in his food than he was—far
less than any monkey. His prejudice against human flesh is
no deep-seated instinct. And so these inhuman sons of
men—! I tried to look at the thing in a scientific spirit. After
all, they were less human and more remote than our
cannibal ancestors of three or four thousand years ago. And
the intelligence that would have made this state of things a
torment had gone. Why should I trouble myself? These Eloi
were mere fatted cattle, which the ant-like Morlocks
preserved and preyed upon—probably saw to the breeding
of. And there was Weena dancing at my side!

<start>
“I had at that time very vague ideas as to the course I
should pursue. My first was to secure some safe place of
refuge, and to make myself such arms of metal or stone as I
could contrive. That necessity was immediate. In the next
place, I hoped to procure some means of fire, so that I should
have the weapon of a torch at hand, for nothing, I knew,
would be more efficient against these Morlocks. Then I
wanted to arrange some contrivance to break open the
doors of bronze under the White Sphinx. I had in mind a
battering ram. I had a persuasion that if I could enter those
doors and carry a blaze of light before me I should discover
the Time Machine and escape. I could not imagine the
Morlocks were strong enough to move it far away. Weena I
had resolved to bring with me to our own time. And turning
such schemes over in my mind I pursued our way towards
the building which my fancy had chosen as our dwelling.

<start>
“Clearly we stood among the ruins of some latter-day
South Kensington! Here, apparently, was the
Palaeontological Section, and a very splendid array of fossils
it must have been, though the inevitable process of decay
that had been staved off for a time, and had, through the
extinction of bacteria and fungi, lost ninety-nine hundredths
of its force, was nevertheless, with extreme sureness if with
extreme slowness at work again upon all its treasures. Here
and there I found traces of the little people in the shape of
rare fossils broken to pieces or threaded in strings upon
reeds. And the cases had in some instances been bodily
removed—by the Morlocks as I judged. The place was very
silent. The thick dust deadened our footsteps. Weena, who
had been rolling a sea urchin down the sloping glass of a
case, presently came, as I stared about me, and very quietly
took my hand and stood beside me.

<start>
This appeared to be
devoted to minerals, and the sight of a block of sulphur set
my mind running on gunpowder. But I could find no
saltpeter; indeed, no nitrates of any kind. Doubtless they
had deliquesced ages ago. Yet the sulphur hung in my mind,
and set up a train of thinking. As for the rest of the contents
of that gallery, though on the whole they were the best
preserved of all I saw, I had little interest. I am no specialist
in mineralogy, and I went on down a very ruinous aisle
running parallel to the first hall I had entered. Apparently
this section had been devoted to natural history, but
everything had long since passed out of recognition. A few
shrivelled and blackened vestiges of what had once been
stuffed animals, desiccated mummies in jars that had once
held spirit, a brown dust of departed plants: that was all! I
was sorry for that, because I should have been glad to trace
the patent readjustments by which the conquest of
animated nature had been attained.

<start>
Then we came to a
gallery of simply colossal proportions, but singularly ill-lit,
the floor of it running downward at a slight angle from the
end at which I entered. At intervals white globes hung from
the ceiling—many of them cracked and smashed—which
suggested that originally the place had been artificially lit.
Here I was more in my element, for rising on either side of
me were the huge bulks of big machines, all greatly
corroded and many broken down, but some still fairly
complete. You know I have a certain weakness for
mechanism, and I was inclined to linger among these; the
more so as for the most part they had the interest of puzzles,
and I could make only the vaguest guesses at what they
were for. I fancied that if I could solve their puzzles I should
find myself in possession of powers that might be of use
against the Morlocks.

<start>
The end I had come in at was quite above
ground, and was lit by rare slit-like windows. As you went
down the length, the ground came up against these
windows, until at last there was a pit like the ‘area’ of a
London house before each, and only a narrow line of
daylight at the top. I went slowly along, puzzling about the
machines, and had been too intent upon them to notice the
gradual diminution of the light, until Weena’s increasing
apprehensions drew my attention. Then I saw that the
gallery ran down at last into a thick darkness. I hesitated,
and then, as I looked round me, I saw that the dust was less
abundant and its surface less even. Further away towards
the dimness, it appeared to be broken by a number of small
narrow footprints. My sense of the immediate presence of
the Morlocks revived at that. I felt that I was wasting my
time in the academic examination of machinery. I called to
mind that it was already far advanced in the afternoon, and
that I had still no weapon, no refuge, and no means of
making a fire. And then down in the remote blackness of the
gallery I heard a peculiar pattering, and the same odd noises
I had heard down the well.

<start>
“I took Weena’s hand. Then, struck with a sudden idea, I
left her and turned to a machine from which projected a
lever not unlike those in a signal-box. Clambering upon the
stand, and grasping this lever in my hands, I put all my
weight upon it sideways. Suddenly Weena, deserted in the
central aisle, began to whimper. I had judged the strength of
the lever pretty correctly, for it snapped after a minute’s
strain, and I rejoined her with a mace in my hand more than
sufficient, I judged, for any Morlock skull I might encounter.
And I longed very much to kill a Morlock or so. Very
inhuman, you may think, to want to go killing one’s own
descendants! But it was impossible, somehow, to feel any
humanity in the things. Only my disinclination to leave
Weena, and a persuasion that if I began to slake my thirst for
murder my Time Machine might suffer, restrained me from
going straight down the gallery and killing the brutes I
heard.

<start>
Well, mace in one hand and Weena in the other, I went
out of that gallery and into another and still larger one,
which at the first glance reminded me of a military chapel
hung with tattered flags. The brown and charred rags that
hung from the sides of it, I presently recognized as the
decaying vestiges of books. They had long since dropped to
pieces, and every semblance of print had left them. But here
and there were warped boards and cracked metallic clasps
that told the tale well enough. Had I been a literary man I
might, perhaps, have moralized upon the futility of all
ambition. But as it was, the thing that struck me with
keenest force was the enormous waste of labour to which
this sombre wilderness of rotting paper testified. At the time
I will confess that I thought chiefly of the Philosophical
Transactions and my own seventeen papers upon physical
optics.


<start>
“Then, going up a broad staircase, we came to what may
once have been a gallery of technical chemistry. And here I
had not a little hope of useful discoveries. Except at one end
where the roof had collapsed, this gallery was well
preserved. I went eagerly to every unbroken case. And at
last, in one of the really airtight cases, I found a box of
matches. Very eagerly I tried them. They were perfectly
good. They were not even damp. I turned to Weena. ‘Dance,’
I cried to her in her own tongue. For now I had a weapon
indeed against the horrible creatures we feared. And so, in
that derelict museum, upon the thick soft carpeting of dust,
to Weena’s huge delight, I solemnly performed a kind of
composite dance, whistling “The Land of the Leal” as
cheerfully as I could. In part it was a modest cancan, in part
a step dance, in part a skirt-dance (so far as my tailcoat
permitted), and in part original. For I am naturally inventive,
as you know.

<start>
“Now, I still think that for this box of matches to have
escaped the wear of time for immemorial years was a most
strange, as for me it was a most fortunate thing. Yet, oddly
enough, I found a far unlikelier substance, and that was
camphor. I found it in a sealed jar, that by chance, I suppose,
had been really hermetically sealed. I fancied at first that it
was paraffin wax, and smashed the glass accordingly. But
the odour of camphor was unmistakable. In the universal
decay this volatile substance had chanced to survive,
perhaps through many thousands of centuries. It reminded
me of a sepia painting I had once seen done from the ink of
a fossil Belemnite that must have perished and become
fossilized millions of years ago. I was about to throw it away,
but I remembered that it was inflammable and burned with a
good bright flame—was, in fact, an excellent candle—and I
put it in my pocket. I found no explosives, however, nor any
means of breaking down the bronze doors. As yet my iron
crowbar was the most helpful thing I had chanced upon.
Nevertheless I left that gallery greatly elated.

<start>
“I cannot tell you all the story of that long afternoon. It
would require a great effort of memory to recall my
explorations in at all the proper order. I remember a long
gallery of rusting stands of arms, and how I hesitated
between my crowbar and a hatchet or a sword. I could not
carry both, however, and my bar of iron promised best
against the bronze gates. There were numbers of guns,
pistols, and rifles. The most were masses of rust, but many
were of some new metal, and still fairly sound. But any
cartridges or powder there may once have been had rotted
into dust. One corner I saw was charred and shattered;
perhaps, I thought, by an explosion among the specimens.
In another place was a vast array of idols—Polynesian,
Mexican, Grecian, Phoenician, every country on earth I
should think. And here, yielding to an irresistible impulse, I
wrote my name upon the nose of a steatite monster from
South America that particularly took my fancy.

<start>
“As the evening drew on, my interest waned. I went
through gallery after gallery, dusty, silent, often ruinous, the
exhibits sometimes mere heaps of rust and lignite,
sometimes fresher. In one place I suddenly found myself
near the model of a tin-mine, and then by the merest
accident I discovered, in an airtight case, two dynamite
cartridges! I shouted ‘Eureka!’ and smashed the case with
joy. Then came a doubt. I hesitated. Then, selecting a little
side gallery, I made my essay. I never felt such a
disappointment as I did in waiting five, ten, fifteen minutes
for an explosion that never came. Of course the things were
dummies, as I might have guessed from their presence. I
really believe that had they not been so, I should have
rushed off incontinently and blown Sphinx, bronze doors,
and (as it proved) my chances of finding the Time Machine,
all together into nonexistence.

<start>
“It was after that, I think, that we came to a little open
court within the palace. It was turfed, and had three fruittrees. 
So we rested and refreshed ourselves. Towards sunset I
began to consider our position. Night was creeping upon us,
and my inaccessible hiding-place had still to be found. But
that troubled me very little now. I had in my possession a
thing that was, perhaps, the best of all defences against the
Morlocks—I had matches! I had the camphor in my pocket,
too, if a blaze were needed. It seemed to me that the best
thing we could do would be to pass the night in the open,
protected by a fire. In the morning there was the getting of
the Time Machine. Towards that, as yet, I had only my iron
mace. But now, with my growing knowledge, I felt very
differently towards those bronze doors. Up to this, I had
refrained from forcing them, largely because of the mystery
on the other side. They had never impressed me as being
very strong, and I hoped to find my bar of iron not altogether
inadequate for the work.

<start>
“So, as I see it, the Upper-world man had drifted towards
his feeble prettiness, and the Under-world to mere
mechanical industry. But that perfect state had lacked one
thing even for mechanical perfection—absolute permanency.
Apparently as time went on, the feeding of the Under-world,
however it was effected, had become disjointed. Mother
Necessity, who had been staved off for a few thousand
years, came back again, and she began below. The Underworld being in contact with machinery, which, however
perfect, still needs some little thought outside habit, had
probably retained perforce rather more initiative, if less of
every other human character, than the Upper. And when
other meat failed them, they turned to what old habit had
hitherto forbidden. So I say I saw it in my last view of the
world of Eight Hundred and Two Thousand Seven Hundred
and One. It may be as wrong an explanation as mortal wit
could invent. It is how the thing shaped itself to me, and as
that I give it to you.
“After the fatigues, excitements, and terrors of the past
days, and in spite of my grief, this seat and the tranquil view
and the warm sunlight were very pleasant. I was very tired
and sleepy, and soon my theorizing passed into dozing.
Catching myself at that, I took my own hint, and spreading
myself out upon the turf I had a long and refreshing sleep.
“I awoke a little before sunsetting. I now felt safe against
being caught napping by the Morlocks, and, stretching


<start>
“About eight or nine in the morning I came to the same seat
of yellow metal from which I had viewed the world upon the
evening of my arrival. I thought of my hasty conclusions
upon that evening and could not refrain from laughing
bitterly at my confidence. Here was the same beautiful
scene, the same abundant foliage, the same splendid
palaces and magnificent ruins, the same silver river running
between its fertile banks. The gay robes of the beautiful
people moved hither and thither among the trees. Some
were bathing in exactly the place where I had saved Weena,
and that suddenly gave me a keen stab of pain. And like
blots upon the landscape rose the cupolas above the ways to
the Under-world. I understood now what all the beauty of the
Over-world people covered. Very pleasant was their day, as
pleasant as the day of the cattle in the field. Like the cattle,
they knew of no enemies and provided against no needs.
And their end was the same.
“I grieved to think how brief the dream of the human
intellect had been. It had committed suicide. It had set itself
steadfastly towards comfort and ease, a balanced society
with security and permanency as its watchword, it had
attained its hopes—to come to this at last. Once, life and
property must have reached almost absolute safety. The rich
had been assured of his wealth and comfort, the toiler
assured of his life and work. No doubt in that perfect world
there had been no unemployed problem, no social question
left unsolved. And a great quiet had followed.

<start>
“She wanted to run to it and play with it. I believe she
would have cast herself into it had I not restrained her. But I
caught her up, and in spite of her struggles, plunged boldly
before me into the wood. For a little way the glare of my fire
lit the path. Looking back presently, I could see, through the
crowded stems, that from my heap of sticks the blaze had
spread to some bushes adjacent, and a curved line of fire
was creeping up the grass of the hill. I laughed at that, and
turned again to the dark trees before me. It was very black,
and Weena clung to me convulsively, but there was still, as
my eyes grew accustomed to the darkness, sufficient light
for me to avoid the stems. Overhead it was simply black,
except where a gap of remote blue sky shone down upon us
here and there. I struck none of my matches because I had
no hand free. Upon my left arm I carried my little one, in my
right hand I had my iron bar.

<start>
“The camphor flickered and went out. I lit a match, and as
I did so, two white forms that had been approaching Weena
dashed hastily away. One was so blinded by the light that he
came straight for me, and I felt his bones grind under the
blow of my fist. He gave a whoop of dismay, staggered a
little way, and fell down. I lit another piece of camphor, and
went on gathering my bonfire. Presently I noticed how dry
was some of the foliage above me, for since my arrival on
the Time Machine, a matter of a week, no rain had fallen. So,
instead of casting about among the trees for fallen twigs, I
began leaping up and dragging down branches. Very soon I
had a choking smoky fire of green wood and dry sticks, and
could economize my camphor. Then I turned to where
Weena lay beside my iron mace. I tried what I could to revive
her, but she lay like one dead. I could not even satisfy
myself whether or not she breathed.